   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Baseball Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by On Baseball How General Managers Foresee a World Series in 2014 Image Nobody knew last February that, of all the ways to chase a championship, the Boston Red Sox's method would be the one to succeed. Credit Illustration by Sam Manchester/The New York Times; Photographs by Getty Images By  Tyler Kepner Feb. 8, 2014 Ten years ago this weekend, The New York Times published an article about the Boston front office under the headline “Red Sox Trying to Picture the Parade.” Team executives, we later learned, were not pleased. They thought the headline was presumptuous and made them sound as if they assumed they would win the World Series. Well, they went on to do just that , adding a title in 2007 and another in October . No team can hold a parade without picturing it, or at least plotting a route to get there. For the 2013 Red Sox, the formula was this: returning core of stars plus new manager plus seven high-character, complementary free agents equals a title. Nobody knew last February that, of all the ways to chase a championship, this would be the one to succeed. “We knew we would be tested, and there would be skepticism, rightfully so, along the way,” said General Manager Ben Cherington, whose 2012 team finished in last place in the American League East. “So we felt like if we had a core, kind of a critical mass of guys in the clubhouse who really wanted to be there for the right reasons, they would embrace everything that came along with being in Boston.” What will be the right recipe for 2014? With most teams opening spring training camps this week, let’s skip ahead to the victory celebration and imagine how baseball’s general managers and decision makers might sum up a run to the championship. ANGELS, Jerry Dipoto Remember when Albert Pujols went on “Sesame Street” last winter? Grover was amazed he was actually an athlete, saying, “Wow, you are good at baseball!” Turns out that was just the start of Albert’s campaign to prove his doubters wrong. ASTROS, Jeff Luhnow We’ve been making steady progress toward building baseball’s best farm system. But when Nolan Ryan accepted our invitation to work for the team, and then somehow made a heroic comeback and threw 25 no-hitters, that accelerated the process to competing. Incidentally, Nolan loves how much hitters strike out these days. ATHLETICS, Billy Beane We finally figured out how to destroy those Al Davis seats in center field: with a barrage of Yoenis Cespedes batting-practice home runs. Once that happened, we swung our karma, and the law of averages went our way. BLUE JAYS, Alex Anthopoulos The problem wasn’t that we hit too many home runs; it was that we didn’t get on base enough to make those home runs matter. Having Jose Reyes healthy set up our offense, and adding three new starting pitchers after the start of spring training really helped. BRAVES, Frank Wren When you have a lot of guys just entering their prime, sometimes they all take a step forward together. But getting Dan Uggla and B. J. Upton back to their old selves, and maintaining a solid pitching staff, put us over the top. BREWERS, Doug Melvin People forget that we were actually over .500 after Ryan Braun’s suspension last year. With Braun back, the offense we already had, a strong bullpen and Matt Garza making our rotation deeper, this isn’t really a surprise to us. CARDINALS, John Mozeliak We didn’t touch the pitching, Peter Bourjos caught everything in center, and Jhonny Peralta gave us a real hitter at short. Knowing that we would have the rookie of the year in Oscar Taveras, we thought it was pretty much a formality that we’d win 110 games before sweeping the World Series. CUBS, Jed Hoyer They tell me our flight home is delayed because pigs are occupying the airspace over O’Hare. So I guess these guys really did win the title. DIAMONDBACKS, Kevin Towers How fitting that Gerardo Parra throws out a guy at the plate to end the World Series. When you have him in right, and Paul Goldschmidt and Mark Trumbo hitting 80 homers in the middle of the order, you don’t need a No. 1 starter to win. DODGERS, Ned Colletti Last year we had the best rotation in baseball, and Dan Haren only made us deeper. With a full season of Yasiel Puig and Brian Wilson, and good health for Matt Kemp and Hanley Ramirez, nobody could stop us. GIANTS, Brian Sabean How many times do we have to say it? Every even-numbered year, we win the World Series. We’ll see you right back here in 2016. INDIANS, Chris Antonetti The funny thing about last year is, we made the playoffs even though some of our best hitters had down years. Guys like Michael Bourn, Asdrubal Cabrera and Nick Swisher were bound to bounce back, and we found a legitimate staff ace in Danny Salazar. MARINERS, Jack Zduriencik Sure, it’s a top-heavy payroll, but Brad Miller, Kyle Seager and Mike Zunino provided major production at minimal cost, and Felix Hernandez, Hisashi Iwakuma and Taijuan Walker gave us three shutdown starters in October. MARLINS, Dan Jennings We built our ballpark on the site of the Orange Bowl, so it was pretty cool to see Jose Fernandez predict this upset and make the No. 1 sign as he left through the tunnel. And no, we’re not trading him. METS, Sandy Alderson Ike Davis, Curtis Granderson and Chris Young all rediscovered their 30-homer bats, and when Bartolo Colon went down in the playoffs, Matt Harvey came off the disabled list. When he struck out Stephen Drew to win the World Series, it was amazin’! NATIONALS, Mike Rizzo Doug Fister gave us a four-deep rotation, Bryce Harper was named the National League’s most valuable player, and Washington is so crazy for us that even congressmen walk around with their shirts untucked like Rafael Soriano after the last out. ORIOLES, Dan Duquette We didn’t do much last winter, but we knew what we had in Dylan Bundy and Kevin Gausman. The way we played after they came up from the minors to lead the rotation, it was like 1966 all over again. PADRES, Josh Byrnes Well, Kennedy/Johnson was the winning ticket back in 1960, and here we are again. Ian Kennedy and Josh Johnson reversed their regression to lead our rotation behind Andrew Cashner, and our young hitters all broke out together. PHILLIES, Ruben Amaro You see, things like experience, saves and runs batted in still have meaning in this game. And when you have two of the best starters in baseball, you have a big edge in a short series. PIRATES, Neal Huntington Yes, we were quiet last winter, but we didn’t need to waste money on so-so free agents when we knew we had impact players coming up from the minors. Gregory Polanco gave the lineup a midseason jolt, and Jameson Taillon was this year’s Michael Wacha. RAYS, Andrew Friedman After seven years of strong teams on low payrolls in the A.L. East, it’s gratifying to finally win the World Series. Now it’s time to trade David Price for some more young talent to keep the good times going. RANGERS, Jon Daniels Shin-Soo Choo and Prince Fielder gave our offense a huge boost, and our pitchers really surprised us by filling in so well for Derek Holland after his knee operation in January. But taking Russell Wilson in the Rule 5 draft gave us that championship edge we’d been missing. RED SOX, Ben Cherington The last time we won a title for the second year in a row was in 1916, and Babe Ruth pitched all 14 innings to win Game 2. But I think Jon Lester’s no-hitter tonight tops even that. REDS, Walt Jocketty You saw in Boston, with John Farrell, how a former pitching coach could make a great manager. Bryan Price proved it for us again this year. But his best move was giving the steal sign to Billy Hamilton as often as possible. ROCKIES, Bill Geivett It’s so rare to find two up-the-middle teammates as dynamic as Carlos Gonzalez and Troy Tulowitzki. And Brett Anderson, LaTroy Hawkins and Boone Logan really stabilized our staff and helped our young pitchers do some amazing things. ROYALS, Dayton Moore The pitching was tremendous, again. But look at our lineup. Last year, our leadoff hitters had a .309 on-base percentage, 13th in the league. Getting Norichika Aoki fixed that, and the young guys behind him finally took that jump we’d been waiting for. TIGERS, Dave Dombrowski The only real difference this postseason was that Miguel Cabrera was healthy, Prince Fielder was gone, and our new late-inning relievers, Bruce Rondon and Joe Nathan, didn’t give up backbreaking grand slams. TWINS, Terry Ryan Byron Buxton and Miguel Sano were 20 when this season started, and now they’ve brought Minneapolis its first title since before they were born. What a thrill to see Phil Hughes jump into the arms of first baseman Joe Mauer after the final out. WHITE SOX, Rick Hahn Nobody thought we’d be standing here after scoring the fewest runs in the league in 2013 while allowing the most unearned runs. But then again, nobody knew how good Jose Abreu would be. YANKEES, Brian Cashman How funny that we won our 28th championship while using only one player under 28 years old in the World Series. Of course, that player was Masahiro Tanaka. His three wins and a save will go down in Yankees lore. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page SP 10 of the New York edition with the headline: Fantasy Baseball, Times 30 . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Related Coverage Same Old Stadium, Same Winning Approach for the A’s Feb. 4, 2014 Image America’s Team? Yankees May Be Japan’s Team Instead Feb. 4, 2014 Image Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              