   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Weddings Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Serena Tufo, Chase Robinson Image Credit Paul Abdoo June 19, 2016 Serena Stanfill Tufo, the daughter of Francesca Stanfill of New York and Peter F. Tufo of Southampton, N.Y., was married June 18 to Dr. Chase William Robinson, a son of Cille Burnside Williams of Denver and the late Tom G. Robinson. The Rev. Peter M. Larsen, an Episcopal priest, performed the ceremony at St. Andrew's Dune Church in Southampton. Mrs. Robinson, 32, is a senior manager for special events for the Children’s Hospital Colorado Foundation in Denver. She graduated from N.Y.U. Her father is a founding partner in the New York law firm Tufo & Zuccotti and was a United States ambassador to Hungary from 1997-2001. Her mother is a writer and novelist; her books include “Shadows and Light” and “Wakefield Hall.” The bride is the stepdaughter of Maya Rana Tufo and of Richard B. Nye. The bride’s stepfather is the managing partner in Baker Nye, an investment firm in New York, and the vice chairman of the board of Lenox Hill Hospital. The bride is the grandaughter of Dennis C. Stanfill of Pasadena, Calif., a former chairman and chief executive of the 20th Century Fox Film Corporation. Dr. Robinson, also 32, is a second-year resident in pathology at the University of Colorado Hospital in Aurora. He graduated from Wake Forest University, from which he also recieved a medical degree. He also has a master’s in physiology and biophysics from Georgetown. His father founded Dynoil, an oil and gas exploration company in Denver. The groom is a stepson of Ronald W. Williams, the chairman of the National Western Stock Show, a two-week rodeo and equestrian and livestock exhibition in Denver. The couple met in Madrid in 2005 during their junior years abroad. They were reunited in 2013, during a ski holiday in Vail, Colo. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page ST 17 of the New York edition with the headline: Serena Tufo,  Chase Robinson . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              