   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index New York Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Four Prominent Suffragist Grave Sites in the Bronx Anticipating a Surge in Visitors This Election Day Image The grave of Elizabeth Cady Stanton at Woodlawn Cemetery in the Bronx on Monday stood ready for visitors. Credit Emon Hassan for The New York Times By  Katie Rogers Nov. 8, 2016 Susan B. Anthony ’s grave site, in Rochester, is a perennial destination for women celebrating their freedom to vote, but on Election Day, Woodlawn Cemetery in the Bronx would like to remind New Yorkers to share the love. At Woodlawn, the grave sites of four other prominent suffragists could use some “I Voted” stickers, like those dotting Anthony’s grave, David Ison, the cemetery’s executive director, said on Monday. The cemetery will even provide the stickers. The idea for turning the sites into selfie-and-sticker destinations came this year after seeing the popularity of Anthony’s grave site grow on social media, Mr. Ison said. The need for some positive messaging after a bruising election season was also important. “We thought, ‘We’re going to do something that’s not all about Trump and all about Clinton,’” Mr. Ison said. Image “I Voted” stickers on card next to Belmont Memorial Chapel, final resting place of Alva Vanderbilt Belmont at Woodlawn Cemetery in the Bronx on Monday. Credit Emon Hassan for The New York Times On Election Day, visitors will be encouraged to leave their stickers on cardboard signs next to the grave sites of four suffragists buried in Woodlawn: Elizabeth Cady Stanton , Anthony’s friend and a co-founder of the National Woman Suffrage Association; Carrie Chapman Catt, who founded the League of Women Voters and who is buried next to Mary Garrett Hay, who assisted and advised her; and Alva Vanderbilt Belmont, a multimillionaire who gave her opinions and her money to the movement. On Monday, as the sun was setting and shadows turned the cemetery chilly, the site of Stanton’s grave was lonely. About 15 “I Voted” stickers were posted near the family monument. A single sticker for Hillary Clinton, the country’s first female presidential nominee from a major party, who has nodded to the suffragists’ legacy throughout her campaign, was also posted. Only one visitor passed by, a man who called out “not yet” to a reporter’s remark that no sticker for Mrs. Clinton’s opponent, Donald J. Trump, had been posted. The graves of the three other suffragists were also deserted. The quiet display is in contrast to reports from the resting place of Susan B. Anthony, where women approach every few minutes with their daughters, friends and mothers. This year, the Mount Hope Cemetery in Rochester anticipates so many visitors that it said it would be open extended hours on Election Day to allow voters the opportunity to swing by and leave a sticker. Barbara Selesky, Woodlawn’s director of marketing, said on Tuesday that the cemetery would extend its visiting days, inviting people to leave their “I Voted” stickers until Sunday. For visitors who make the trek to the Bronx, the crew at Woodlawn asks just one thing: Please keep the stickers off the granite. The museum has put up a display next to the tombstone where visitors can leave stickers and other sticky mementos. “Stickers on graves have become a problem,” Susan Olsen, the cemetery’s historian, said. “It’s love and it’s honoring, but it just causes problems.” At Woodlawn, a cemetery roughly half the size of Central Park, the legacy of four prominent suffragists competes for the limelight with several more famous neighbors, including Miles Davis, Celia Cruz and Herman Melville. When asked to explain the difference in popularity, Mr. Ison and Ms. Olsen both joked in unison, “There’s nothing else to do in Rochester.” (Also, they said, Anthony was on the $1 coin.) But if the work of the suffragists has taught us anything, it’s that Stanton and Anthony might not have seen this as a competition. In a way, it may be fitting of how they saw their different legacies: Stanton, a married mother of seven who lived in New York, supplied speech material and support as Anthony traveled extensively as a public face of the movement. “They saw their relationship very clearly,” Ms. Olsen, Woodlawn’s historian, said. “She’s in the metropolis, and Anthony goes all over the place. They were brilliant as far as how their partnership worked.” Neither woman lived to see the ratification of the 19th Amendment in 1920. In Stanton’s obituary , published in The New York Times in 1902, Anthony fondly recalled their dynamic, saying, “She forged the thunderbolts and I fired them.” Sarah Maslin Nir contributed reporting from Rochester, N.Y.  Find out what you need to know about the 2016 presidential race today, and get politics news updates via Facebook , Twitter and the Morning Briefing newsletter . Related Coverage Voters Gather at Susan B. Anthony’s Grave in Rochester Nov. 8, 2016 Image On Election Day, the Hillary Clinton White Suit Effect Nov. 7, 2016 Image Why Hillary Wore White July 29, 2016 Image Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              