   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Business Day Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by The Week Ahead Oil Company Earnings, Trader’s ‘Flash Crash’ Hearing and the Jobs Report By  The New York Times Jan. 31, 2016 Alphabet and Yahoo to Report Earnings Alphabet is expected to report earnings on Monday and, for the first time, to reveal financial data for each entity under its holding company structure — that includes the online ad unit Google, and the smart device maker Nest, among others. On Tuesday, Yahoo is scheduled to report earnings, with its chief executive, Marissa Mayer, under scrutiny for her plan to spin off the company’s core assets and under pressure to give more details about the maneuver. — Pui-Wing Tam Argentina and Hedge Funds in Debt Mediation Representatives from the government of Argentina and a group of New York hedge funds will meet with a court-appointed mediator in Manhattan on Monday to try to resolve a decade-long legal battle over billions of dollars of bonds that Argentina defaulted on in 2001. The hedge funds, led by Paul E. Singer’s fund Elliott Management, have sued Argentina over the defaulted bonds and are seeking repayment and interest. Alfonso Prat-Gay, Argentina’s economy minister, has said publicly that he intends to make an offer to settle the debt dispute. Luis Caputo, the finance secretary, could present that offer at the meeting. — Alexandra Stevenson December Consumer Spending Report On Monday, the Commerce Department is expected to release data on personal income and spending for December. Many retailers complained about slumping holiday-season shopping, pointing in particular to a warm spell in the Northeast that discouraged the purchase of outerwear and other winter clothing. The unseasonable weather probably dampened spending for utilities as well. Consumer spending, which accounts for more than two-thirds of the country’s economic activity, is a major driver of the economy, but analysts are forecasting that sales were flat. Personal income is expected to rise by 0.2 percent. — Patricia Cohen January Auto Sales and G.M. Year-End Results Automakers on Tuesday are scheduled to report sales of new vehicles in the United States for January. While the pace of sales was brisk for most of the month, overall industry volumes were probably curtailed by the effects of severe weather in the Northeast and Southern states. On Wednesday, General Motors, the nation’s biggest automaker, will announce its fourth-quarter and full-year financial results for 2015. The company is expected to report an increase in profits from the previous year, despite spending more than $2 billion to settle a Justice Department investigation into defective ignition switches tied to 124 deaths and to compensate victims of wrecks in the affected vehicles. — Bill Vlasic Exxon Mobil, BP and Royal Dutch Shell Earnings Exxon Mobil, Royal Dutch Shell and BP will report their quarterly earnings starting on Tuesday, and the results are not expected to be pretty. Oil prices dropped nearly 20 percent in the fourth quarter, and natural gas prices also slumped. The only saving grace for the integrated oil companies is that they have large refining and chemical businesses that are helped by the low prices of the raw materials they process. The biggest oil companies have put off, so far, the large dividend cuts of the smaller independents, but they can be expected to announce more cuts in investments and, maybe, personnel. Analysts will be listening closely for hints that the companies are looking to buy up the cheap assets of companies that are under financial stress. — Clifford Krauss Puerto Rico Debt Hearings Looking for ways to help Puerto Rico pay off nearly $72 billion in debt, a House Natural Resources subcommittee will hold a hearing in Washington on Tuesday to consider whether a federal authority should be created to oversee the island’s spending and budget. Some members of Congress have suggested that a control board would be a condition of granting financial relief to the commonwealth. Democrats in Congress and the Obama administration have been urging a variety of steps to help Puerto Rico, including giving the island bankruptcy protection, but Republicans have been reluctant. Recently, the speaker of the House, Paul D. Ryan, Republican of Wisconsin, urged members of Congress to work toward a solution. Also on Tuesday, the president of the Puerto Rico Senate, Eduardo Bhatia, a Democrat, will begin a series of hearings in San Juan aimed at exploring the reasons behind the $9 billion debt facing the Puerto Rico Electric Power Authority. — Mary Williams Walsh More European Bank Annual Results European banks will be in the spotlight again this week as the Swiss lenders UBS and Credit Suisse and BNP Paribas of France are set to report their annual results. The mood has been somber, so far, as turmoil in the markets has eaten into fourth-quarter revenue and several banks have taken charges for litigation and conduct issues. Last week, Deutsche Bank posted a huge loss in 2015 and the Royal Bank of Scotland said it would once again post an annual loss. Both banks said they were taking charges to resolve past misconduct. Banco Santander of Spain also saw much of its fourth-quarter profit eroded by one-time charges. — Chad Bray European Regulators to Rule on Data Movement Europe’s national privacy regulators will pass judgment on Wednesday over renewed efforts by American and European lawmakers to allow companies to move digital data from people’s online searches and social media posts between the two regions. The decision will be closely watched by companies like Google and Facebook, which are expected to face further legal challenges by European privacy campaigners over how they collect, manage and use individuals’ data when transferred to the United States. — Mark Scott Shkreli a Witness in Hearing on Drug Prices A House committee will hold a hearing Thursday on the rapid increase in drug prices. Martin Shkreli, the former chief executive of Turing Pharmaceuticals, who is facing federal securities fraud charges, is listed by the committee as a witness but is expected to exercise his Fifth Amendment rights and not answer questions. Turing, under Mr. Shkreli’s leadership, spurred a firestorm of controversy with its 50-fold increase in the price of a decades-old drug for a parasitic disease. The committee subpoenaed Mr. Shkreli and wrangled with his lawyers. Also scheduled to testify is Howard B. Schiller, the interim chief executive of Valeant Pharmaceuticals International, which has also been criticized for huge price increases, most recently by the Democratic presidential hopeful Hillary Clinton. The hearing, originally scheduled for Jan. 26, was postponed because of a snowstorm. — Andrew Pollack Image Navinder Singh Sarao Credit Toby Melville/Reuters ‘Flash Crash’ Hearing on Trader Extradition Navinder Singh Sarao, a British futures trader, is expected back in court on Thursday for a two-day hearing to determine whether he will be sent to the United States to face charges that he engaged in improper trading that contributed to a sudden plunge in American stock markets in 2010 known as the “flash crash.” Mr. Sarao was arrested in Britain in April and has been fighting extradition. — Chad Bray January Jobs Report On Friday, at 8:30 a.m., the Labor Department will release figures on hiring and unemployment in January. Given the drop on Wall Street since the beginning of the year, as well as the anemic data for economic growth that have been accumulating recently, economists will be closely watching this report to see how the job market has been holding up. The consensus calls for a gain of 195,000 jobs, with the unemployment rate remaining unchanged at 5 percent. But there is plenty of reason to think a surprise is possible. December’s gain of 292,000 jobs was unusually strong. As a result, some experts see some payback in January as growth moderates. On the other hand, the service sector of the economy is doing fairly well, so January could bring another positive surprise. — Nelson D. Schwartz A version of this article appears in print on , on Page B 2 of the New York edition . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              