   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Business Day Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Common Sense A Marriage Gone Bad: Walgreens Struggles to Shake Off Theranos Image A Theranos Wellness Center inside a Walgreens Pharmacy in Phoenix. The drugstore chain has been trying to distance itself from the blood-testing start-up. Credit Steve Craft for The New York Times By  James B. Stewart April 21, 2016 Many boldface names enabled the stratospheric rise of the blood-testing start-up Theranos: two former secretaries of state, a former secretary of defense, two former senators, a retired admiral, venture capitalists, scientific luminaries and a prestigious clinic. None has been more important to Theranos than Walgreens. The sprawling drugstore chain, now a part of Walgreens Boots Alliance , was Theranos’s first — and thus far only — direct-to-consumer retail partner, promising to eventually make Theranos’s “wellness centers” an integral part of its more than 8,000 stores nationwide. When it announced the deal in 2013, Walgreens hoped to drive traffic to its stores and bask in the reflected glow from one of Silicon Valley’s hottest unicorns and its youthful founder and glamorous chief executive, Elizabeth Holmes. For unproved Theranos, the Walgreens endorsement was akin to the Good Housekeeping seal of approval. Theranos’s valuation vaulted to $9 billion and put Ms. Holmes on the Forbes list of billionaires. Nearly three years later, with Theranos under siege on multiple regulatory fronts and its reputation in tatters , it’s clear that the relationship has been a disaster for Walgreens. The company has been trying to distance itself, halting expansion of Theranos testing in its stores and, in January, threatening to end the partnership if Theranos did not meet regulatory standards within 30 days. But that deadline has come and gone. With this week’s news that Theranos is under criminal investigation for, among other things, possibly defrauding Walgreens and other investors, the question is: What will it take for Walgreens to end its troubled relationship? While the legal agreement between Theranos and Walgreens isn’t public, legal experts said nearly all such contracts have a termination clause that anticipates something can go wrong. (If this one doesn’t, Walgreens would have a good case for suing its lawyers for malpractice.) Video Maria Shriver discusses her “Today” show interview with Elizabeth Holmes, the chief executive of Theranos. Published On April 19, 2016 Credit Image by CNBC And any contract can be voided if it was induced by a material misrepresentation — such as Theranos’s overstating the capabilities of its nanotechnology — even if it was an innocent mistake. “I’d be shocked if Walgreens doesn’t have a contractual right to terminate the contract right now,” said George Triantis, an expert on contract design and dispute resolution at Stanford Law School. Walgreens declined to comment. It’s easy to see why Walgreens would have been so infatuated with Theranos and its revolutionary scientific promises. When the deal was announced, a news release trumpeted Theranos’s claim that its “kind, minimally invasive collection” technology using blood drawn from a “tiny finger stick or microsample” would revolutionize blood testing and empower consumers, not to mention attract them to Walgreens stores. The Wall Street Journal reported that Walgreens was so eager to cement the relationship that it lent Theranos money, acquired warrants to buy Theranos stock and skipped its usual due diligence when evaluating a pharmacy partner. The report was confirmed by a person involved in the relationship who spoke on the condition that he not be named because of continuing investigations and the likelihood of litigation. Not that Walgreens would have learned much: Theranos was as secretive about its technology with Walgreens as it was with everyone else. Walgreens eventually opened 40 Theranos wellness centers in Arizona in a pilot program, and one in Palo Alto, Calif., close to Theranos’s headquarters. The companies sealed their relationship in November 2013 with a ribbon-cutting ceremony at the opening of a Theranos wellness center in Scottsdale, Ariz., attended by Ms. Holmes; Gregory Wasson, chief executive of Walgreens at the time; and Mayor Greg Stanton of Phoenix. Mr. Stanton, too, jumped on the too-good-to-check bandwagon, hailing Theranos’s “revolutionary lab testing program that makes diagnosis of illnesses fast, inexpensive and convenient.” Theranos’s claim that it could run the full gamut of blood tests on a microsample from a finger prick using its own breakthrough technology proved to be grossly exaggerated, if not entirely false. At most, Theranos performed a few tests using such technology, and recently has been using tiny samples for only one out of every 240 tests. The accuracy of even those few tests has been questioned. Last year, Walgreens said it would halt any expansion of Theranos wellness centers in its stores. After federal regulators warned Theranos in January that practices at its California lab “pose immediate jeopardy to patient health and safety,” Walgreens stopped Theranos testing at its location in Palo Alto and said no patient samples collected in Arizona could be sent to the California lab. Video James B. Stewart, on CNBC, talks about the struggling relationship between Walgreens and Theranos. Published On April 22, 2016 Earlier this month, federal regulators said they planned to revoke the license for Theranos’s California lab for failing to meet minimum standards and proposed banning Ms. Holmes from owning or running any lab for two years. This week brought news of the criminal investigation into whether Theranos misled investors. In every case, Walgreens was blindsided, the insider told me, learning the bad news from media reports or from regulators rather than Theranos itself. This has hardly endeared Theranos to its ostensible partner’s directors and executives. Theranos declined to comment. Walgreens hasn’t disclosed the amount of its investment in Theranos, saying only that it isn’t material. But the reputational damage, especially for a drugstore chain trying to reposition itself as a champion of consumer health and well-being, has been considerable. “It’s obvious they’d love to get out of this,” said Ross Muken, a senior managing director at Evercore, an investment bank, and head of its health care research team. “It’s an unwanted distraction for a company that otherwise seems to be on the mend.” The Walgreens executives responsible for the Theranos deal, including Mr. Wasson, as well as the chief financial officer and the president of the company’s pharmacy unit, have all been replaced, forced out in 2014 by activist investors after Walgreens acquired the European drugstore chain Alliance Boots. But their departures had little to do with the ill-fated partnership with Theranos, whose troubles became public after they left. “I don’t know that you can really blame them, given how secretive Theranos has been,” Mr. Muken said. “They’re not molecular biologists.” Nonetheless, he added, “this is another black mark on what was already a checkered record of delivering for shareholders. Now the new team has to get out of this.” Theranos’s lawyers have taken a hard line, insisting that Walgreens is contractually bound by their agreement. So far, the approach has worked. Walgreens appears to have taken a cautious approach toward terminating the relationship, perhaps preferring to wait until federal regulators impose penalties or the criminal investigation yields formal charges, either of which would strengthen Walgreens’s hand. But that could take years. Theranos can appeal any penalties, and a grand jury investigation could be a protracted process. And Theranos is likely to sue Walgreens in any event if it terminates their agreement. In the meantime, Walgreens risks being dragged into nearly every negative story about Theranos. “A host of things can go wrong in these kinds of partnerships,” Professor Triantis said. “There are two general ways to deal with the risks: One is to sue for damages if this happens. But the much better way is to terminate the contract and the relationship rather than risk even more damage to reputation.” A version of this article appears in print on , on Page B 1 of the New York edition with the headline: A Promising Marriage Gone Sour . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Related Coverage Walgreens Says No Customers’ Tests Will Be Done at Theranos Lab in California Jan. 28, 2016 Image Theranos Lab May Pose Threat to Patient Safety, Regulator Says Jan. 27, 2016 Image The Narrative Frays for Theranos and Elizabeth Holmes Oct. 29, 2015 Image Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              