   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Real Estate Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Our Year of Living Airbnb Image Elaine Kuok and David Roberts return from grocery shopping in their Chelsea neighborhood, where they are staying at a short-term rental secured through Airbnb. Credit Nicole Bengiveno/The New York Times By  David Roberts Nov. 25, 2015 Alistair Cooke once described New York as “the biggest collection of villages in the world,” and I dreamed of living in them all. That wanderlust, rather than my work as an academic physicist or diplomat, had compelled me to move constantly between continents with my wife, Elaine Kuok, for more than 15 years. Last fall, we decided to follow her art career as a painter and sculptor to New York and finally settle down. But after we had searched for a home to buy or rent long-term, Elaine realized she didn’t want to take the plunge without first knowing the city and its neighborhoods better. Here was my chance to live the dream. I proposed that we do an experiment and move to a different neighborhood every month for a year. We would find apartments using Airbnb , the website that has rocked the travel industry by offering short-term rentals, often in private homes. Elaine said yes, her fears allayed by the service’s safeguards. She liked that we could check out user reviews of our prospective hosts and in particular, Airbnb’s policy of refunding your money or finding you a replacement if, within 24 hours of moving in, you realize the place isn’t as advertised. And my wish to village-hop aside, I wondered if Airbnb could fundamentally alter the way we live, not just the way we travel. We initially focused on the downtown name-brand neighborhoods — Chelsea, West Village, SoHo — which happily also seemed to have the most Airbnb listings. We read the reviews closely, screening for noise and other potentially nasty surprises, from among the listings for places within our budget, which we based on the median rent in New York — roughly $100 a night, or $3,000 a month. Our intent, actually, was to stay at least 30 days at each place, so our hosts would be on the right side of the law. Rental of a private room in the city for less than 30 days is legal only when a permanent resident  is present during the stay, and we wanted the places to ourselves. A handful of hosts denied us, presumably because we were new to the Airbnb system and there were no host reviews of us as guests, another Airbnb feature. But finally, after a week of back and forth with hosts, we found a place just a few days before the date we wanted to move in. As winter set in, and while the bulk of our belongings made their languorous journey across the Pacific from Bangkok, we took our three suitcases to Chelsea for our maiden Airbnb foray. Here was artsy New York, where Sid and Nancy became Sid and Nancy, and from which an imposing branch of the Gagosian Gallery presides over the art world today. A residential neighborhood of walk-ups, cafes and rats, right in the center of it all, Chelsea epitomized our image of city living, a fitting first stop on our home-free journey. But as soon as we entered our one-bedroom rear-facing walk-up, we were struck by the smell of gas. Worried, we alerted our host, who came over and called the fire department. Within minutes, sirens drew near. Helmeted men burst into the apartment. “Smells like garbage,” said one. “Spearmint,” declared another. And they were gone. A shrug of the shoulders, and our host was gone, too. We set out bowls of vinegar, scattered charcoal briquettes, and dusted the floors with baking soda, to no avail. Defeated, Elaine bought a pint of Ben & Jerry’s Chubby Hubby for consolation, but in a few hours it had turned to sludge — the freezer was warmer than the fridge. Mercifully, Airbnb took control of the situation and moved us within days upstairs to one of our host’s street-facing one-bedroom units — bigger, brighter and mostly odorless (albeit with a daily wake-up call of honking and a blitzkrieg of profanities from frustrated drivers).  We later came to recognize the cold, commercial experience offered by this host and others of his ilk, with multiple listings of impersonally furnished places and a willingness to let non-reviewed guests stay, was something we wished to avoid. According to a 2014 state report , though only 6 percent of Airbnb hosts rented out more than two units, they represented more than a third of the reservations in New York. The same report found the majority of the city’s short-term rentals to be illegal and that short-term rentals have made thousands of apartments unavailable as long-term housing, both key reasons Airbnb is controversial in New York and other places. We enjoyed the homier experience of staying in someone’s actual place at our next stop, on the north side of Williamsburg, Brooklyn, two blocks from where Frank Serpico was shot. A studio, it was decorated with Titanic-style suitcases, the leather boxlike kind made for voyages, not trips; a big white “S,” perhaps from the sign of a defunct drugstore; a big red “O” in a font that made me think of an old-time movie theater; a manual typewriter; and so forth. But beneath this vintage look was a morbid vibe. A fractured skull of some horned animal hung from the wall — could have been a deer, but I’m no zoologist. A porcelain hand on a shelf grasped upward, suggesting a drowning man. The dark iron overhead light with its squirrel-cage filament bulbs screamed torture chamber. A window into our host’s soul, or perhaps just the passing fashion. Williamsburg is set against a backdrop of exposed brick. The shops go overboard with individual touches, yet somehow they all look the same; the residents seem similarly afflicted. With some neighborhoods you wish you could stay longer, but a month here was sufficient — long enough to do a field study of hipster subspecies, to discover gems like Best Pizza (which really does have the best pizza) and to realize that having been born in the late 1970s, we were too old for this party. As the taxi pulled up to our next address, Hamsterdam of “The Wire” came to mind. We were in an edgy part of Gowanus, an industrial strip in Brooklyn on the early side of transitional, centered on a canal so polluted it won a mention on the Superfund National Priorities List. There was no key inside the designated black shoe so, as instructed by our host, we used a credit card on the lock (accidentally jimmying the neighbor’s lock first — without success, thank goodness) and found the previous occupant’s suitcases still there, open. The central heating had apparently been broken for years and the weather forecast predicted a blizzard. When dealing with the frustrations of city living, it’s nice to have folks on speed dial incentivized to help. Airbnb went beyond its 24-hour policy of issuing a refund for substandard accommodation, sending us by taxi to a swanky hotel in Times Square for the night, all expenses paid. It suggested some alternative listings, but we ended up finding a new place ourselves, and by the next day, we were on our way to the border of East Harlem and the Upper East Side. Our rear-facing prewar one-bedroom, where the couch sagged and the shower was in the kitchen, was as silent as a padded cell. Here, the heat blasted unbidden, from which we escaped by opening the windows to winter’s coldest month. That first night, on the way to the corner store to get some food, we dodged mice scurrying between bags of trash. Back in the kitchen, Elaine fired up the stove by the bath towels, but when the pasta from the corner store hit the boiling water, a few little worms floated to the top. I skipped dinner that night. Image Through Airbnb, David Roberts and Elaine Kuok have ventured into, clockwise from top left, East Harlem; Gowanus, Brooklyn; the West Village; and the East Village, among other places. Credit Nicole Bengiveno/The New York Times Not a great first impression, but, in this itinerant lifestyle, one tends to be more tolerant of a place’s shortcomings. Bold graffiti art brought color to the wintry surroundings; the gruff lady at the workaday diner nearby would sneak you extra for trying to speak Spanish; and New York’s best carrot cake shop was next door to the worm pasta corner store, which we came to think of fondly as our bodega. I wonder if, given time, Hamsterdam would have grown on us. At one point, we took a trip back to my hometown in Alabama to escape the bitter cold and paying rent — a nice perk of living home-free. Our 108 boxes of household effects had arrived from Bangkok, and we realized we hadn’t missed my heretofore cherished books, Elaine’s cookware or the stacks of clothes we had accumulated over the years. We sold or donated the majority, storing only things of sentimental value in my parents’ closets. Then it was back to trawling through Airbnb listings. Frustrated with the stock of apartments in our price range, I started contacting hosts of more expensive places, up to triple our budget. Whereas before only a handful had met our constraints, now there were dozens upon dozens. I spent hours sorting through these, each listing providing a glimpse at how people in this city live. I learned to recognize red flags. In addition to the hosts like the guy in Chelsea (you’re probably looking at one if the same profile picture keeps popping up, or if the host has scores of reviews for other listings), and fifth-floor walk-ups (if you can’t tell from the reviews or the photos, don’t book until the host tells you what floor the apartment is on), drawn curtains and limited photos suggest spaces that might have something to hide. To the hosts of places that resonated, I would explain our back story, our home-free experiment, and ask if he or she would let us stay for a month for our budget or thereabouts. As E. B. White said, “No one should come to New York to live unless he is willing to be lucky.” Within days, the owner of a chic SoHo one-bedroom who admired Elaine’s paintings on her website actually said yes, and we and our suitcases moved in. Her home was filled with one-of-a-kind things from her travels. I remember in particular the Kashmiri rug in the entryway, handmade in a style that isn’t used anymore. I avoided stepping on it even barefoot. Elaine was taken by the Peugeot pepper grinder and the toaster with a digital display counting down to crusty perfection. However, even this high-tech assistance and Le Creuset pots couldn’t put her back in gourmet mode. It always takes her time to get going in a new kitchen, my sad sacrifice to the home-free lifestyle. Fortunately, I never tire of two of New York’s finest attributes — its pizza and bagels. SoHo today is more boutiques than the wild artist enclaves depicted in Scorsese’s “After Hours,” but some magic remains. As a parting gift, Elaine left her painting of Patti Smith near our host’s special edition of “Just Kids.” Taken by the image, our host planned to show it to the punk-rock poet, who happened to live down the street. Our luck continued, taking us to a two-bedroom in the West Village filled with works by South African artists and a wine cooler kept precisely at 52 degrees, just blocks from where Hitchcock’s “Rear Window” took place, and near the corner that is said to have inspired Edward Hopper’s “Nighthawks.” Our host did not ask us to hide the fact that we were Airbnb-ing the place; typically we were told to say we were the host’s “friends.” Even when a place is being rented legally, many hosts feel it best not to alert the neighbors. We were there on the cusp of spring, in time to watch the skeletons by the roadside slowly reveal themselves to be cherry trees — a glorious sight up and down the tangle of streets dotted with what looked like amazing restaurants (we wouldn’t know because we couldn’t afford them). Sumptuous though the West Village is now, I wish I had been there when it was the Bohemian mecca of Joseph Mitchell’s writings — full of poets and artists. Would these natural wanderers have embraced this new home-free lifestyle or dismissed it simply as an indulgent take on minimalist living? Our growing reputation as responsible guests, measured by our hosts’ reviews, made us increasingly attractive to potential new hosts on Airbnb. We came back to Brooklyn in style — a massive three-bedroom duplex apartment and techie start-up headquarters in Fort Greene, near a former home of John Steinbeck . Enamored of mobile homes in his later years, Steinbeck reflected on America’s migrant heritage and rootlessness, ruminations that have some bearing on living home-free: “Perhaps we have overrated roots as a psychic need. Maybe the greater urge, the deeper and more ancient is the need, the will, the hunger to be somewhere else.” Since Steinbeck’s time, Fort Greene bottomed out with widespread crime and poverty in the 1970s and ’80s, and now has come full circle to once again be a welcoming home for aspiring young writers. Next, we hit the jackpot in the East Village with space enough to dance in a subsidized co-op dominated by Chinese and Ukrainian old-timers. The common areas looked strictly institutional and occasionally smelled like pot, but our apartment windows framed a magnificent view over this varied city. The two bedrooms looked out to the Empire State and Chrysler buildings in the distance, and down upon the psychic on the corner; the balcony faced Alphabet City next door. We had been attracted to the East Village ever since a memorable dinner we shared with some new friends — a pleasant lesbian couple in their late 60s — at a tiny Thai restaurant in the area. Everyone there knew everyone else from decades of being neighbors. A 6-year-old customer, the very image of the actor Joseph Gordon-Levitt, made the rounds in the dining area and the kitchen where, from the sound of it, he was received with enthusiasm. Given our chosen lifestyle, it might seem strange that the rootedness of this community resonated with us. But looking back over the time that, together, Elaine and I moved between London and Paris, Tokyo and Bangkok, the southern tip of Africa and the high desert of New Mexico, I realize that I had always been rooted, just not by a fixed address. With the sharing economy, a home-free lifestyle is now becoming accessible to normal people, not just the superrich. And as out there as living this way may sound today, the city is replete with shareable stuff that was initially seen as bizarre: Uber and Citi Bike, for instance. Our experiment has taught us many things, among them that our initial choice of neighborhoods, such as the West Village and SoHo, was lovely for visitors, celebrities and bankers, but less ideal for the proletariat.  It showed us also that there were gems to be discovered, such as Cobble Hill, Brooklyn, which we liked so much we extended our stay to two months. Living home-free requires the right temperament. If I’m anything to go by, it’s a combination of wanderlust and an urge to diversify the risk of, say, being stuck next to a construction site. Elaine, on the other hand, sometimes finds this lifestyle disorienting, though fortunately she is anchored by a work space she found in Chinatown. She is a creature of habit and on more than one occasion has taken the wrong train, returning to one of our former abodes. While we laugh about that, what I do find disconcerting is that she no longer goes out of her way to connect with the community the way she used to — not getting to know the Bengali fruit sellers, the supers, the dog walkers, the crazies. Nevertheless, Elaine will tell you the constant change has honed her awareness of passing time and that she still prefers living this way to navigating the city’s brutal rental market — unless you ask her when there’s been another all-too-frequent 11th-hour cancellation. So although our experimental year has passed, our address is still Airbnb. There are times I miss thumbing through my books and being Elaine’s guinea pig as she tested her way through stacks of recipes. Elaine sometimes longs to look through our photographs from the analog days. Yet, whenever we set off for the next place with all our possessions in a taxi’s trunk, even Elaine reexperiences the catharsis we both felt when we first pared down our belongings. And I dream of the next adventure. David Roberts is a senior adviser at the Harvard Kennedy School. He is producing two documentaries on Asia.  For weekly email updates on residential real estate news, sign up here . Follow us on Twitter: @nytrealestate . A version of this article appears in print on , on Page RE 1 of the New York edition with the headline: Our Year of Living Airbnb . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              