   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Politics Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Letter From Washington Ballot Is Expected to Offer Stark Choice on Economy Image Hillary Clinton at a campaign event in Pittsburgh this month. She emphasizes that most of her economic initiatives are paid for. Credit Eric Thayer for The New York Times By  Albert R. Hunt | Bloomberg View June 26, 2016 The contempt that Hillary Clinton and Donald J. Trump express for each other will continue to play out in vitriolic sound bites. But their profound differences on what to do about the economy and the struggling middle class are far more important. “This election will be won by whichever candidate convinces middle-class voters they are better for their jobs and future prospects,” said Stephen Moore, an economist at the Heritage Foundation and an adviser to Mr. Trump. Gene B. Sperling, a leading economic official under President Bill Clinton and President Obama, and an adviser to Mrs. Clinton, said, “This is about whether economic forces hollow out the middle class or whether those forces strengthen the middle class, creating jobs and higher wages.” As the economy has recovered from the 2008 crisis, the unemployment rate has shrunk to less than half of what it was eight years ago and wages have started to rise. But median average family income, in real dollars, is less than it was 10 years ago. On the issue voters say is their top concern, the two presumptive nominees offer radically different remedies. Mrs. Clinton goes out of her way to show that most of her initiatives are paid for. Mr. Trump, in defiance of Republican orthodoxy , seems unfazed by debt. He proudly says that borrowing fueled his business ventures and has even suggested that as president, he might try to negotiate down American debt obligations. Mrs. Clinton’s agenda includes calls for a higher minimum wage, 12 weeks’ paid leave for chronically ill workers and parents with a newborn, more funds for job training and education, especially higher education, and a $275 billion infrastructure plan. She would raise taxes by $1.1 trillion over the next decade, the Tax Policy Center estimates . These raises are mainly aimed at wealthier Americans and include higher capital gains taxes on assets held for longer periods, a larger estate tax for wealthy heirs, and closing some corporate loopholes and advantages enjoyed by hedge fund and private equity executives. These increases will be offset, however, by a subsequent middle-class tax cut. Mr. Trump, by contrast, has offered huge tax cuts, which policy experts estimate will cost $9 trillion to $11 trillion over a decade. He also vows to end or soften many federal regulations, which he calls job killers. Look for him to focus on a pro-growth energy policy that his camp calculates would split two of Mrs. Clinton’s important constituencies: labor and environmentalists. But the core of Mr. Trump’s proposals for job creation involves getting tough on trade by renegotiating previous treaties and imposing heavy duties on imports, particularly from China or Mexico. Although international laws and the need for congressional approval could inhibit such actions, a president does have flexibility to impose some trade sanctions. In the coming months, each candidate will be pressed to provide more specifics; Mr. Trump has been especially vague. He has delegated two advocates of supply-side tax cuts to revise his plan to make it less costly. One of them, Mr. Moore of the Heritage Foundation, says the objective is to cut the projected deficit by at least two-thirds, to around $3 trillion over a decade. This, he says, would be achieved primarily by limiting deductions for upper-income taxpayers. Mr. Sperling suggests that a middle-class tax cut, higher education and a larger infrastructure plan “are candidates for expansion” by Mrs. Clinton. Until more specifics are forthcoming, it is difficult to gauge the economic impact of either candidate’s plans. Several economic analyses, including those by Moody’s Analytics and the U.S. Chamber of Commerce, have estimated that Mr. Trump’s plans, primarily because they rely on protectionism, deportation of undocumented workers and debt, would throw the economy into a recession. Mr. Trump rejects that contention and says that he would create growth of 6 percent a year, a level last achieved in 1983. Related Coverage The Moody’s Economic Report That Clinton Is Using to Attack Trump June 21, 2016 Image Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              