   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Baseball Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by He Catches What Umps Might Miss Image One of Brett Weber’s duties with the Yankees is to keep a close eye on two flat-panel screens for umpires’ mistakes during games. Credit Richard Perry/The New York Times By  Billy Witz April 19, 2016 Brett Weber, drafted by the Yankees in the 14th round in 1998, never rose above Class A in the minor leagues. Now he watches their home games from a windowless room in the ballpark. Weber, 39, stares at two flat-panel screens that carry up to 15 camera angles of the game, keeping an eye out for an umpire’s mistake that might prompt him to pick up the red phone that is a direct line to the Yankees’ dugout. Most fans have never seen Weber, and few realize that in any one game he might exert as much influence on the outcome as a player on the field. As the Yankees’ video replay monitor, it is his job to alert the coaching staff in the dugout if he believes the team should challenge an umpire’s call. Video replay — which has been expanded this year, its third season in Major League Baseball — is affecting games like never before, with wins and losses hinging on reviews of everything from potential home runs to foul balls and collisions at home plate. Nobody has been more proficient at using it than Weber. The Yankees have had the highest success rate in baseball since replay was instituted, winning 77.6 percent of their challenges, far above the rate of the Miami Marlins, who are next at 65.5 percent. The rate for the majors is 52.2 percent. “The whole purpose of replay is just to get it right and make it fair for everybody,” Yankees reliever Andrew Miller said. “But the reality is, some teams are better than others. I think our guy is better and quicker than the other guys out there, so that’s an advantage for us.” Video replay carries even greater weight this year because of new rules open to review, including those for slides into second base. In the opening week of the season, a video challenge ended a game between Tampa Bay and Toronto when an apparent forceout that would have scored two runs and put Toronto ahead was overturned because of  an illegal slide , resulting in a game-ending double play. Unlike in the N.F.L., in which all scoring plays and turnovers are automatically reviewed, and the N.B.A., in which reviews are initiated by referees, a vast majority of replay reviews in baseball are initiated by managers. And because managers are allowed one challenge per game — they maintain the challenge if their appeal is successful — there can be rewards for diligently using the system. The Yankees have also been judicious. Their 58 challenges since 2014 are tied for the fewest in the majors, and they had not challenged any plays through the first 11 games of this season. The Rays had made the most challenges (109 through Sunday’s games), one more than the Chicago Cubs, who had won the most overturned calls (54). Before the first pitch is thrown Wednesday night at Yankee Stadium, Weber will grab a cup of coffee or tea, walk past a sign that reads, “Do Your Job,” and settle into a swivel chair in front of the two screens. He is not sure how he ended up with this job. It just sort of landed in his lap — pretty much like all of his other varied duties. Image Yankees Manager Joe Girardi met with an umpiring crew to challenge that James Loney left early from second on a two-run sacrifice fly by the Tampa Bay Rays in September 2014. Credit Chris O'Meara/Associated Press Weber’s title, major league coaching assistant, is rather amorphous. “I like it like that,” he said with a smile. He throws batting practice most days, stands in as a first baseman during infield drills, assists with video preparation, charts pitches, helps convey analytical data to players and is available if players want extra work. In the winter, he shifts to the front office, preparing scouting reports in the quantitative analysis department. Such a pliable skill set is what one might expect from somebody who studied finance and psychology while playing baseball at the University of Illinois. A year after he was drafted by the Yankees, he seemed to be developing into a pitching prospect, with an 8-4 record, 23 saves and a 1.97 E.R.A. at Class A Greensboro. But he then had the first of two elbow operations, missed two seasons and was released. He pitched for two years in an independent league, but at the end of 2004, Weber was 28 and was not getting phone calls from any major league organizations. “It was just time to move on,” said Weber, who landed a job as a stock analyst in Chicago. While he appreciated learning about the corporate environment and passed his exam to become a licensed broker, “that competitiveness never went away and my passion for baseball never went away,” he said. Five years later, knowing that his background in finance might be seen as an asset in baseball, Weber reached out to Yankees General Manager Brian Cashman. Two weeks before the start of spring training in 2009, Cashman offered him a job. “When I was hired initially, I wanted to make sure it would be O.K. if I worked in the off-season,” Weber said. “I’m very interested in understanding the analytics side of baseball — it certainly piqued my interest in how the game is changing.” When Weber was asked to handle replay reviews, he approached it in the same manner he did stock reports or scouting reports: He dived into research. He studied success rates of N.F.L. challenges and spoke with teams at both ends of the spectrum, as well as someone at the N.F.L. offices. In that first season, seemingly everyone in baseball had a different approach. The Oakland A’s used color-coded, numbered cards from 1 to 5 to signal to Manager Bob Melvin whether to appeal: A red 1 meant no appeal, a green 5 meant absolutely, and a yellow 3 was a coin flip. (From the seventh inning on, the umpires can initiate a replay review on their own.) “There are some philosophies that say challenge everything; if you lose, you lose it,” Weber said. “I go back to, it’s either right or wrong. I think our process works, but we continue to tweak it.” Manager Joe Girardi added: “It’s not like you get as many as you want, so if you call for a replay, you better be right. Webby is usually right on. I don’t even run back and look, and I could run back and look in our clubhouse. I trust him with anything.” That trust was reinforced last July 3 when Tampa Bay’s Evan Longoria hit a ball into the left-field corner in the 11th inning and slid into second base ahead of the tag by Jose Pirela. Umpire C. B. Bucknor signaled safe. But Weber recognized on the slow-motion replay what was not recognizable to the naked eye: When Longoria popped up from his slide, he lost contact with the base for an instant while Pirela kept the tag on him. “He called, and I’m like, ‘What is he calling for?’ ” Girardi said. Upon review, Longoria was out. It’s hard to know how the game would have otherwise turned out, but the path to victory was easier for the Yankees, who won on Brian McCann’s 12th-inning home run. Consider that in the American League, the Houston Astros edged the Los Angeles Angels for the final playoff spot by one game. And the Yankees were only one game ahead of the Astros. Home teams and visiting teams are supplied the same equipment, a pair of flat-screen computer monitors that are about 2 ½ feet wide by 1 ½ feet tall. Though the monitors have access to 15 camera angles, they can vary by ballpark and by which TV network is broadcasting the game. Those 15 shots can be configured in numerous positions and sizes on the monitors. Weber communicates with Rob Thomson, the bench coach, on the dedicated phone line that goes directly to the dugout, much like the one from the bullpen. “A couple times I’ve gotten a call telling me to get one of the pitchers up,” said Weber, whose report is relayed by Thomson to Girardi. When the Yankees are on the road, the monitors are set up in different places — in Toronto, where they played last week, they are in a shack adjacent to the clubhouse. The setup at Yankee Stadium is in the video room, which can be a hive of activity during games. Pitchers, hitters and coaches duck in and out, looking at one of the four TV screens or seven computer monitors to pick up clues from the previous inning that will help them outwit the opponent. The audio feed from a Yankees TV or radio broadcast is piped through four speakers. When a controversial play occurs, there is no shortage of back-seat drivers. “I’ve had quite a few — I guess I’d call them replay assistants,” Weber said. “Hiroki Kuroda, I’d always do the opposite, but he’d always have an opinion. Everybody has opinions.” Kuroda, a pitcher, left after 2014, but of the current players, Miller and outfielder Brett Gardner are the voices most frequently in his ear — often voting with their heart more than their head. Alex Rodriguez is also a regular presence in the room. “It’s got to be an overwhelming position to be in — you’re never out there, you’re never seen, but potentially a game could hinge on a decision you make from down in the dungeon,” Miller said. “There is usually three or four guys looking over his shoulder — is that ball fair or foul? He handles us being around pretty well.” Weber said his focus, attuned by an ever-present cup of coffee or tea, was on the monitors. He charts pitches — cataloging location, velocity and pitch type — and leaves only if he needs to take a bathroom break between innings. If Weber spots a play that might be worth reviewing, he typically has about 10 seconds to look at the replays and make an assessment. “I’m pretty locked in during the game,” he said. “It’s kind of just background noise.” Weber deflects any credit for overturning calls. He says the satisfaction he gets is in helping players. If, for example, the catcher McCann throws out a runner, then he deserves to get credit for it. If Gardner beats a throw to first base, he should be rewarded with a hit. There is, however, one underrated perk of the job. “It’s the only time that I’m able to tell the manager what to do,” Weber said. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page B 10 of the New York edition with the headline: He Catches What Umps Might Miss . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Related Coverage For Yankees, Pursuit of Titles Requires Tough Decisions April 17, 2016 Image Yankees and Alex Rodriguez End Skids in Win Over Mariners April 17, 2016 Image Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              