   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Middle East Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by The Case Against Netanyahu: Highlights From the Police Investigation By  David M. Halbfinger Feb. 13, 2018 JERUSALEM — The Israeli police recommended Tuesday that Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu be charged with bribery, fraud and breach of trust in two parallel graft cases. The attorney general must now decide whether to indict Mr. Netanyahu, a process that could take months. Here are highlights of the conclusions presented by police investigators. Case 1000: Illicit Gifts THE ALLEGATIONS Mr. Netanyahu accepted nearly $300,000 in gifts between 2007 and 2016 from two businessmen, the Hollywood producer Arnon Milchan and the Australian billionaire James Packer — gifts that grew in “scope and frequency” after Mr. Netanyahu became prime minister in 2009. ‘A RELATIONSHIP OF BRIBERY’ Mr. Netanyahu’s relationship with Mr. Milchan “was not an innocent relationship between friends.” Rather, Mr. Milchan gave him gifts “in return for his action” to help Mr. Milchan in concrete ways, including financially. Image Arnon Milchan’s gifts to Mr. Netanyahu, beginning in 2007, ran to more than $210,000. Credit Kevin Winter/Getty Images A SHARED BURDEN Mr. Milchan’s gifts to Mr. Netanyahu, beginning in 2007, ran to more than $210,000; Mr. Packer’s, dating to 2014, totaled more than $70,000. “The two businessmen decided to share the prime minister’s costs between them,” the police said. A BIG TAX BREAK Mr. Netanyahu tried to pass legislation that would double, to 20 years, the duration of a tax exemption for Israelis returning to the country from overseas, which would have “vast financial value to Milchan.” This was rejected by the Finance Ministry, then headed by Yair Lapid, now a chief opponent of Mr. Netanyahu’s. Image James Packer’s gifts to Mr. Netanyahu, dating to 2014, totaled more than $70,000. Credit Tim Wimborne/Reuters VISA TROUBLE Mr. Netanyahu lobbied the secretary of state at the time, John Kerry, and the United States ambassador to Israel at the time, Daniel B. Shapiro, to help Mr. Milchan deal with a problem extending his visa, which had “far-reaching financial significance” to the producer. A TV CHANNEL STAKE Mr. Netanyahu, in his capacity as communications minister, tried to help Mr. Milchan become a shareholder in Israeli television’s Channel 2. TATA The prime minister tried to aid a project that Mr. Milchan was pursuing with Ratan Tata, the Indian billionaire, identified in Israeli news reports as a free-trade zone proposed near the Israeli-Jordanian border. The Defense Ministry opposed it and the project went nowhere. THE BOTTOM LINE According to the police, Mr. Netanyahu should be charged with accepting bribes, fraud and breach of trust in relation to Mr. Milchan and only the latter two crimes in connection with Mr. Packer, and Mr. Milchan should be charged with giving bribes. No recommendation about Mr. Packer was made. Case 2000: Back-Room Deals THE ALLEGATIONS Mr. Netanyahu and Arnon Mozes, publisher of Yediot Aharonot, one of Israel’s leading newspapers, struck a “barter deal” in 2009 to advance their interests. In theory, Mr. Netanyahu would get positive and supportive coverage from Yediot Aharonot. (Whether that happened is unclear.) Image Arnon Mozes, the publisher of Yediot Aharonoth, one of Israel’s leading newspapers, struck a “barter deal” with Mr. Netanyahu in 2009 to advance their interests. Credit Reuters Mr. Mozes would get Mr. Netanyahu’s support in promoting Yediot Aharonot, including help curbing the strength of Israel Hayom, a free newspaper that is owned by Sheldon Adelson, a supporter of Mr. Netanyahu’s, and that had become a powerful competitor to Yediot. CRUCIAL EVIDENCE Audio recordings of meetings between Mr. Netanyahu and Mr. Mozes were made secretly on the cellphone of Ari Harow, Mr. Netanyahu’s former chief of staff, now a government witness. THE BOTTOM LINE According to the police, Mr. Netanyahu should be charged with requesting a bribe, fraud and breach of trust, and Mr. Mozes should be charged with offering a bribe. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page A 9 of the New York edition with the headline: Highlights From Parallel Cases In Israel Against Netanyahu . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Related Coverage Corruption Charges Suggested for Netanyahu Feb. 13, 2018 Image Trusted Netanyahu Adviser Caught Up in Corruption Inquiry Nov. 7, 2017 Image As Netanyahu Investigators Close In, Some Ask: How Long Can He Hold On? Aug. 6, 2017 Image As Investigations Intensify, Israel Imagines Life After Netanyahu Aug. 8, 2017 Image Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              