   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Movies Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Movie Listings for Jan. 22-28 Image A Museum of Modern Art tribute to the choreographer Jack Cole will include the film “Gentlemen Prefer Blondes,” starring Marilyn Monroe. See listing below. Credit 20th Century-Fox, via Photofest Jan. 21, 2016 Ratings and running times are in parentheses; foreign films have English subtitles. Full reviews of all current releases: nytimes.com/movies. ‘Alvin and the Chipmunks: The Road Chip’ (PG, 1:26) The latest big-screen adventure of the unkillable singing chipmunks, the fourth in the franchise, features a simpler plot than the previous two films. It also puts the focus back on Alvin, Theodore and Simon, leaving the female trio, the Chipettes, in the background. The boys are worried about what they think are the engagement plans of their human minder, Dave, and take a road trip to disrupt them. Catchy songs abound. (Neil Genzlinger) ‘Anomalisa’ (R, 1:30) Directed by Charlie Kaufman and Duke Johnson, this sad, stirringly painful stop-motion puppet whatsit centers on a floundering soul (voiced by David Thewlis) who, while on a business trip, has an affair with a stranger (Jennifer Jason Leigh). An invaluable Tom Noonan voices everyone else. (Manohla Dargis) ★ ‘The Big Short’ (R, 2:10) Adam McKay’s adaptation of the Michael Lewis best seller is a wildly entertaining movie that leaves you nauseated and shaking with rage. That’s as it should be, since Mr. McKay and his energetic cast (including Steve Carell, Christian Bale, Brad Pitt and Ryan Gosling) set out to capture both the giddy thrills of the economic bubble of the mid-2000s and the moral corruption that fueled it. Rooting for the film’s designated good guys means rooting for economic collapse, and you feel the awfulness of this contradiction. (A. O. Scott) ‘Bleak Street’ (No rating, 1:39, in Spanish) Arturo Ripstein’s film, based on a real-life Mexican murder case, is by turns funny and grotesque, surreal and sad. It chronicles the fateful encounter between two pint-size wrestlers and a pair of aging prostitutes in a dreamlike, noir-tinged demimonde. (Scott) ★ ‘Bridge of Spies’ (PG-13, 2:15) In this gravely moody, perfectly directed thriller about a real 1962 spy swap, Steven Spielberg returns you to the good old bad days of the Cold War and its fictions, with their bottomless political chasms and moral gray areas. Tom Hanks leads a terrific cast that includes Mark Rylance as a Soviet mole and Scott Shepherd as a C.I.A. operative. (Dargis) ★ ‘Brooklyn’ (PG-13, 1:51) Saoirse Ronan gives a remarkably lively and subtle performance as Eilis Lacey, a young woman who emigrates from Ireland to New York in the early 1950s, in John Crowley’s lovely adaptation of the novel by Colm Toibin. (Scott) ★ ‘Carol’ (R, 1:58) Todd Haynes’s gorgeous adaptation of a Patricia Highsmith novel stars Rooney Mara as Therese Belivet, a young woman in early-1950s New York who falls for an older suburban housewife played by Cate Blanchett. The blossoming of their love affair is related in subdued colors and whispered words, and it lingers in the air like an old song. (Scott) ★ ‘Chi-Raq’ (R, 1:58) Furious, funny and wildly uneven, Spike Lee’s latest is a restaging of Aristophanes’ fifth-century B.C. sex-strike comedy, “Lysistrata,” now set in a Chicago where sidewalks are washed with blood and hearts beat to the rhythm of gunfire. (Dargis) ‘Concussion’ (PG-13, 2:03) This fact-and-fiction hybrid stars Will Smith as a crusading doctor — the real Dr. Bennet Omalu — who sets out to discover why some professional football players are dying too young. Written and directed by Peter Landesman, the movie has a cause and heart but not enough real tension. (Dargis) ★ ‘Creed’ (PG-13, 2:13) The “Rocky” saga, revised and reborn, with the Italian Stallion in the role of the grizzled trainer, helping a young contender prepare for his shot at the title. The contender is Adonis Johnson (Michael B. Jordan), the love child of Apollo Creed, Rocky’s erstwhile nemesis and eventual best friend. The director is Ryan Coogler (“Fruitvale Station”), at 29 a rising champion in his own right. (Scott) ‘Daddy’s Home’ (PG-13, 1:36) An ugly psychological cockfight posing as a family friendly comedy, the father-stepfather competition pits a meek Will Ferrell against a feral Mark Wahlberg. It is best avoided unless a movie that has the attitude of a schoolyard bully happens to be your thing. (Stephen Holden) ‘The Danish Girl’ (R, 2:00) The story of a transgender pioneer, Lili Elbe, becomes a tasteful, sensitive and somewhat inert costume drama in the hands of Tom Hooper (“The King’s Speech”). Eddie Redmayne plays Lili, whom we first encounter as Einar Wegener, a Danish landscape painter. His wife, Gerda (Alicia Vikander), also an artist, is the emotional center of the film, in part because Mr. Redmayne’s performance, while technically flawless, keeps the audience at a distance from Lili’s experience. (Scott) ‘The Forest’ (PG-13, 1:33) If you aren’t bothered by the use of real-life suicides as the inspiration for a horror movie, ”The Forest” is a decently made creeper. Natalie Dormer plays both halves of a pair of twins: Jess, who has disappeared in the so-called Suicide Forest at the base of Mount Fuji in Japan, and Sara, who travels there to look for her. In real life, the forest is where many people have gone to end their lives. In the movie, it has a supernatural pull, causing anyone who ventures into it to lose touch with reality. Ms. Dormer handles the deterioration convincingly. (Genzlinger) ★ ‘45 Years’ (R, 1:35) Andrew Haigh’s new film is a loving, devastating portrait of a long, happy marriage that encounters an unusual crisis. Charlotte Rampling and Tom Courtenay play Kate and Geoff Mercer, whose plans for an anniversary party are disrupted by news about an old, long-dead girlfriend of Geoff’s. (Scott) ★ ‘The Good Dinosaur’ (PG, 1:40) In the beginning there was a dinosaur — followed by a kid scampering after him on all fours. That’s the story in Pixar’s latest, a lovely, eccentric charmer directed by Peter Sohn in which a gentle dinosaur roams the earth with a doglike boy. (Dargis) ‘The Hateful Eight’ (R, 2:48) More talking and killing from Quentin Tarantino, this time in a frontier outpost after the Civil War. Some interesting ideas about the racial politics of the Western genre peek out amid the verbiage and the violence, but Mr. Tarantino’s grandstanding gets in the way. With Kurt Russell, Jennifer Jason Leigh and Samuel L. Jackson, whose performance as a former Union officer almost lifts the film out of its self-conscious rut. (Scott) ★ ‘The Hunger Games: Mockingjay Part 2’ (PG-13, 2:16) Katniss Everdeen (Jennifer Lawrence) returns to finish the fight, defeat the enemy and send off a big-screen series that has had an astonishing run both in cold-cash terms and in its meaningful symbolism. She’s ready (and so are you). (Dargis) ★ ‘Janis: Little Girl Blue’ (No rating, 1:43) The documentary biography of Janis Joplin sustains a compelling double vision of Joplin, the needy lost child, pleading for love in a baby’s primal squall, and Joplin, the hippie rock-blues mama she was on her way to becoming when she died at 27 of a drug overdose. (Holden) ‘Joy’ (PG-13, 2:04) Jennifer Lawrence, at her tough, radiant best, plays Joy Mangano, an entrepreneur stymied by her family in David O. Russell’s rousing and chaotic fable of bootstrap capitalism. (Scott) ‘Macbeth’ (R, 1:52) The best reason to see this slick version of the sanguineous tragedy is Michael Fassbender’s exceptionally fine title performance, though the writing isn’t bad, either. A mushy-mouthed Marion Cotillard co-stars; Justin Kurzel directed. (Dargis) ★ ‘The Martian’ (PG-13, 2:21) Matt Damon stars in Ridley Scott’s space western and blissed-out cosmic high about an American astronaut who, like a latter-day Robinson Crusoe, learns to survive on his own island of despair. Funny, loose and optimistic. (Dargis) ★ ‘Mustang’ (PG-13, 1:37, in Turkish) Full of life, “Mustang” is a stunning debut feature by Deniz Gamze Ergüven about five sisters in rural Turkey. Confined to their grandmother’s house, the girls bridle against losing their freedoms in a story grounded in both laughter and tears, and in the resilient strength of these girls against soul-deadening strictures. (Nicolas Rapold) ‘Norm of the North’ (PG, 1:33) An entirely misbegotten animated movie about a “funny” polar bear trying to block condos in the Arctic. “The Revenant,” which is no kind of kid’s movie at all, is nevertheless a better kid’s movie. (Glenn Kenny) ‘Only Yesterday’ (No rating, 1:58, in Japanese) Isao Takahata, an Academy Award nominee and one of the twin pillars of the anime giant Studio Ghibli, brings the cleareyed grace of his animation to the lovely story of a 27-year-old woman looking back on her childhood. Originally released in Japan in 1991, the film is receiving a freshly voiced — and very welcome — United States release for its 25th anniversary. (Rapold) ★ ‘Peggy Guggenheim: Art Addict’ (No rating, 1:37) Lisa Immordino Vreeland’s sleek, entertaining portrait of the collector who assembled one of the great troves of modern art is well organized, with hundreds of beautiful images spanning decades of artists Guggenheim knew, galleries she ran, parties she hosted. Using tapes of interviews before she died in 1979, the documentary is imbued with Guggenheim’s presence, even as art-world denizens dish on her foibles and vanities. (Daniel M. Gold) ‘Point Break’ (PG-13, 1:53) An athlete turned F.B.I. agent (Luke Bracey) infiltrates a gang of extreme-sports radicals (led by Edgar Ramirez as “Bodhi”) who purport to honor the earth through daring criminal acts. In Ericson Core’s remake of Kathryn Bigelow’s superior 1991 thriller, the balky story is just dramatic filler between impressive showcases of wingsuiting, motorbiking and the like. (Rapold) ‘The Revenant’ (R, 2:36) By turns soaring and overblown, this American foundation story from the director Alejandro G. Iñárritu (“Birdman”) features a battalion of very fine, hardworking actors. None are more diligently committed than Leonardo DiCaprio, as a 1823 mountain man who endures a crucible of suffering. (Dargis) ‘Ride Along 2’ (PG-13, 1:42) A lot like the first “Ride Along,” only less so. Ice Cube and Kevin Hart reprise their oil-and-water buddy-cop routine. Nothing new to see, but not too painful either. (Scott) ‘Room’ (R, 1:58) Brie Larson and an exceptional child actor, Jacob Tremblay, play mother and son in the adaptation of Emma Donoghue’s novel. Written by Ms. Donoghue and directed by Lenny Abrahamson, the movie flickers with grace and imagination during its initial half but devolves into a dreary, platitudinous therapy movie in its second. (Dargis) ‘In the Shadow of Women’ (No rating, in French, 1:13) A sly and slender tale of infidelity from Philippe Garrel, the French master of emotional ambivalence. (Scott) ‘Sisters’ (R, 1:58) It’s always fun to watch Amy Poehler and Tina Fey together, but it would be more fun if this movie weren’t such a cobbled-together mess of tired raunch and weak sentimentality. (Scott) ‘Son of Saul’ (R, 1:47, in Hungarian, German, Yiddish and Polish) This debut feature from the 38-year-old Hungarian filmmaker Laszlo Nemes is a powerful but ungainly blend of allegory and thriller set in a Nazi death camp. Saul (Geza Rohrig) is a member of the Sonderkommando, Jewish inmates assigned to assist in the murder of their fellow prisoners in exchange for meager privileges. In his company, the viewer is given a tour of horror that is unnerving both for its harshness and for the sense of slick, self-congratulatory artifice that lurks around the edges of the frame. (Scott) ‘Spectre’ (PG-13, 2:28) Bond, James Bond, etc. (Dargis) ★ ‘Spotlight’ (R, 2:07) A team of Boston Globe investigative reporters — played by Michael Keaton, Brian d’Arcy James, Rachel McAdams and Mark Ruffalo — takes on the local archdiocese in this powerful fact-based newspaper procedural, directed by Tom McCarthy. The movie, with a superb cast and a tightly constructed script, is an unflinching investigation of systemic moral rot and a rousing defense of the values of professional journalism. (Scott) ‘Star Wars: The Force Awakens’ (PG-13, 2:15) It’s good! (Dargis) ’13 Hours: The Secret Soldiers of Benghazi’ (R, 2:24) A pummeling slog, Michael Bay’s latest revisits the 2012 attack on the diplomatic mission in Libya that resulted in the deaths of four Americans, including Ambassador J. Christopher Stevens. Mr. Bay again proves that coherency (visual, etc.) isn’t a prerequisite for his style of blunt-force cinema. (Dargis) ★ ‘The Treasure’ (No rating, 1:29, in Romanian) The latest film from Corneliu Porumbiou, Romania’s master of deadpan existential proceduralism, observes two hard-pressed middle-class guys digging for riches that may or may not be buried in a backyard. Their adventure is part fairy-tale, part farce, and an astute examination of the social and moral state of Europe in an age of economic crisis and political malaise. (Scott) ★ ‘Troublemakers: The Story of Land Art ' (No rating, 1:12) The writer and director James Crump’s cogent, brisk survey of a group of American artists using the environment as their medium is worth seeing on the biggest screen possible for its generous views of sprawling pieces like the legendary “Spiral Jetty” by Robert Smithson. (Kenny) ‘Trumbo’ (R, 2:04) This clunker about the blacklisted screenwriter Dalton Trumbo (Bryan Cranston) tells a great-man story with a patchwork of fact and fiction, mixing in the odd bit of newsreel with a great many dull, visually flat and poorly lighted dramatic scenes. Jay Roach directed. (Dargis) ‘Youth’ (R, 2:04) Paolo Sorrentino follows the luxurious melancholy of “The Great Beauty” with this weary rumination on aging, set in a spectacular Alpine resort. Michael Caine and Harvey Keitel play old friends — a composer and a filmmaker — who feel their erotic and creative powers waning as the world goes on its decadent way. (Scott) Film Series Abstract Expressionist Cinema: Ken Jacobs/Nervous Magic Lantern Festival (Friday though Sunday) The experimental filmmaker Ken Jacobs, perhaps best known for his seven-hour found-footage opus “Star Spangled to Death,” periodically performs publicly with what he calls the Nervous Magic Lantern system: Using light, fans, a spinning shutter and his own hands, Mr. Jacobs projects images that you will swear have been recorded on a strip of film. The performance is perhaps as close as you can come to replicating the mind-set of the pre-film experimentation of the 1870s and 1880s, although this weekend, Mr. Jacobs’s shows will accompany musicians whom Anthology Film Archives describes as some of New York’s most daring. At 8 p.m., 32-34 Second Avenue, at Second Street, East Village, 212-505-5181, anthologyfilmarchives.org. (Ben Kenigsberg) All That Jack (Cole) (through Feb. 4) The Museum of Modern Art’s series looks at Jack Cole (1911-1974), a choreographer who helped to popularize the “theatrical jazz” style associated with Jerome Robbins and Bob Fosse. He is also responsible for some of the most memorable numbers put on film, including Rita Hayworth’s rendition of “Put the Blame on Mame” in “Gilda” (Tuesday and Feb. 3) and Marilyn Monroe’s shimmying to “Diamonds Are a Girl’s Best Friend” in “Gentlemen Prefer Blondes” (Wednesday and Feb. 1). Cole himself appears as a character in Vincente Minnelli’s 1957 marital farce “Designing Woman” (Friday and Feb. 4). As the choreographer friend of a wealthy fashion designer (Lauren Bacall), Cole annoys her new husband, a sports reporter (Gregory Peck), by crashing into a card table; later, he puts his dancer’s dexterity to heroic use in a climactic brawl. Museum of Modern Art Roy and Niuta Titus Theaters, 212-708-9400, moma.org/visit/film. (Kenigsberg) January Brunch: On the QT (Saturdays and Sundays, through Jan. 31) Nodding to the recently released “The Hateful Eight,” the Nitehawk Cinema gathers Quentin Tarantino movies made when his works were a mere two-and-a-half hours or less. Up next is “Reservoir Dogs” (1992), a lean, mean and sometimes hilarious caper. It is followed next week by “True Romance” (1993) — directed by Tony Scott from a Tarantino script — with a perfect cast that makes his dialogue sing (Jan. 30 and 31). At various times, 136 Metropolitan Avenue, near Berry Street, Williamsburg, Brooklyn, 718-384-3980, nitehawkcinema.com; some shows are sold out. (Andy Webster) ‘The Lighted Field’ (Saturday) In a career overview and remembrance of the avant-garde filmmaker Andrew Noren, who died last May in relative obscurity, J. Hoberman wrote in The New York Times that a posthumous appraisal might have the effect of “confirming Mr. Noren’s place among the significant American film artists of his generation.” Because many of Mr. Noren’s films may no longer survive, this tribute screening at the Museum of the Moving Image offers what, for now, is a rare chance to dive in. Mr. Hoberman describes “The Lighted Field,” a 1987 film that combines diary and archival footage, as one of Mr. Noren’s greatest. At 4:30 p.m., 35th Avenue at 37th Street, Astoria, Queens, 718-784-0077, movingimage.us. (Kenigsberg) Modern Matinees: A Pioneer Cowboy (through Feb. 26) Even in the 1910s, when stage-trained actors with unconventional looks could mosey their way onto the big screen more easily, William S. Hart and his melancholy woodcarving of a face cut a jarring figure. An acquaintance of Wyatt Earp and an accomplished Shakespearean actor on Broadway, Hart didn’t arrive in Hollywood until he was 49. He made up for lost time, appearing in more than 60 films in just over a decade. This Museum of Modern Art retrospective includes the boisterous 1916 Western “Hell’s Hinges” (Friday), in which Hart’s gunman sees the light when a preacher and his sister arrive in the titular territory, described in the film’s intertitles as “a gun-fighting, man-killing, devil’s den of iniquity that scorched even the sun-parched soil on which it stood.” On various days, a detailed schedule is at moma.org. (Eric Grode) New York Jewish Film Festival (through Jan. 26) This event, presented by Film Society of Lincoln Center and the Jewish Museum, offers a constellation of viewpoints on the Jewish experience, looking to the festival’s history as it celebrates its 25th anniversary and speaking to Judaism’s present. At various times, Walter Reade Theater and the Elinor Bunin Munroe Film Center, on West 65th Street, Lincoln Center. A schedule is at nyjff.org. (Webster) ‘The Verdict’ (Friday through Sunday) Paul Newman stars as an alcoholic Boston attorney who impulsively takes a malpractice case to trial, despite seasoned opposition from the hospital’s lawyer (James Mason at his most ripe) and a judge (Milo O’Shea) who seems determined to stack the deck against Newman’s case. The film, directed by Sidney Lumet from a script by David Mamet, is showing as part of a continuing series on the great Charlotte Rampling, whose recent role in “45 Years” earned her an Oscar nomination for best actress. Here, she plays the hero’s less-than-loyal love interest. (The series continues through March 6.) At 11 a.m., IFC Center, 323 Avenue of the Americas, at Third Street, Greenwich Village, 212-924-7771, ifccenter.com. (Kenigsberg) A version of this article appears in print on , on Page C 16 of the New York edition with the headline: The Listings: Movies . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              