   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index U.S. Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Long Night in Senate, but Real Budget Work Awaits Image Rand Paul of Kentucky with lobbyists Thursday. The Senate passed its budget plan, 52 to 46. Credit Gabriella Demczuk for The New York Times By  Jonathan Weisman March 27, 2015 WASHINGTON — Emerging from an all-night session that was more exhausting than dramatic, Senate Republicans on Friday squeaked through a budget blueprint that would repeal the Affordable Care Act, fundamentally remake federal health care for the poor and elderly, and push the federal deficit toward zero over the next decade. The 52-to-46 vote came at 3:28 a.m. after the Senate considered hundreds of amendments and voted on dozens — many of them politically freighted, some of them contradictory, but none of them binding. No Democrats voted for the budget. Among Republicans, only Senator Rand Paul of Kentucky, who is likely to seek the White House, and Senator Ted Cruz of Texas, who has announced his intention to do so, voted no. Senator Michael B. Enzi of Wyoming, the chairman of the Budget Committee, hailed a plan that he said would “protect the nation’s most vulnerable citizens, strengthen national defense and bring robust economic growth.” Democrats said it would be a disaster — if it ever happened. The House passed its budget plan on Wednesday. Now, Senate and House negotiators hope to take similar tax-and-spending plans and negotiate the first common congressional budget in a decade. Then would come the difficult work, turning a hard-fought, aspirational document into the actual legislation that the budget promises: an end to the Affordable Care Act; a Medicare system transformed, with vouchers for older adults to buy private insurance; drastic cuts to Medicaid and food stamps, which would be turned over to the states; and a simplified tax code with a far lower top income tax rate. “Fortunately for the country, the Republican budget will not become law,” said Senator Harry Reid of Nevada, the minority leader. Representative Paul D. Ryan of Wisconsin, who as the House Ways and Means chairman will have his hand in much of the legislative effort, was taking a step-by-step approach to the task. He said a series of legislative deadlines would guide Congress more than the budget’s prescriptions. The expiration of the highway trust fund on May 31 will be the first order of business. President Obama and lawmakers in both parties have proposed a novel way of funding a major infrastructure effort: mandate the repatriation of hundreds of billions in corporate profits stashed overseas, then tax it at a special low rate, with the proceeds dedicated to roads, bridges, transit and airports. But Mr. Ryan and the president want that initiative to be part of a much broader overhaul of the business tax code that would lower the corporate tax rate and close loopholes. The Senate on Thursday night approved an advisory amendment from the chairman of the Finance Committee, Orrin G. Hatch of Utah, and its ranking Democrat, Ron Wyden of Oregon, ordering just such an overhaul by voice vote. Mr. Ryan said conversations had already begun about a short-term highway trust fund extension as both chambers try to build momentum for a rewrite of the business tax code. The next deadline is likely to come in late June, when the Supreme Court decides whether residents of states that use the federal insurance marketplace have wrongfully been given subsidies to purchase insurance. If the justices side with the plaintiffs against the Obama administration, they will have done far more to dismantle the Affordable Care Act than the House and Senate budgets. The documents mandate its repeal and include expedited parliamentary rules, called reconciliation, that ensure that legislation to repeal the act cannot be filibustered in the Senate. Republican leaders in both chambers would move quickly to replace the health care law with a temporary measure that does away with the law’s mandates, regulations and tax increases, and then move toward a broader replacement bill. That first effort would probably be vetoed by Mr. Obama, setting the stage, Republicans hope, for bipartisan negotiations over the summer to find a health care alternative. “That determines when we get to move a robust replacement bill” for the Affordable Care Act, Mr. Ryan said of the Supreme Court decision. The most important function of a budget is to set top-line spending limits for military and domestic programs at Congress’s discretion, and the House and Senate documents stuck to the strict caps mandated by the Budget Control Act of 2011. But lawmakers in both parties acknowledge that even that prescription might not hold. The president has vowed to veto appropriations bills that abide by those caps, which he says are too severe. Republicans in both chambers skirted the limit on military spending by moving to put around $40 billion into a war-fighting account that does not count against that cap. In a duel between possible Republican White House hopefuls, Senator Marco Rubio of Florida moved to raise the Defense Department’s core budget without paying for it. He was rebuffed on 68-to-32 vote. Senator Paul followed suit with an amendment to raise military spending as well, but to pay for it in large part with deep cuts to foreign aid. It was rejected, 96 to 4. But the pressure is mounting to do more. Defense Department officials say they need relief in the military’s training, maintenance and procurement budgets, not in its overseas operations. And even some congressional conservatives say domestic programs like medical research and Homeland Security are badly stretched. An amendment by Senator Tim Kaine, Democrat of Virginia, called for a lifting of the spending limits, paid for by changes to entitlement programs other than Social Security, a re-examination of other programs and the ending of some tax loopholes. It passed, 50 to 48. Senate Republicans did set some policy stakes in the ground, some of them surprising. The Senate voted, 54 to 46, to fully repeal the estate tax, even though next year, the value of estates subject to it will have to exceed $5.43 million, or nearly $11 million for a couple. Only about 3,700 estates, or 0.12 percent of the total, were expected to owe any federal estate tax last year. Republicans helped pass Democratic amendments guaranteeing Social Security and veterans benefits for same-sex couples in states that do not recognize same-sex marriage, and a bipartisan majority voted for federally guaranteed paid sick leave. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page A 13 of the New York edition with the headline: Long Night in Senate, but Real Budget Work Awaits . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              