   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Art & Design Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Art Review Drawings? Maybe, but Certainly the Art of Frustration Image Jean Dubuffet’s “Le Métro,” a gouache from 1943. Credit 2016 Jean Dubuffet/Artists Rights Society (ARS), New York/ADAGP, Paris; Centre National d’Art et de Culture Georges Pompidou, Paris, Musee National d’Art Moderne/Centre de Creation Industrielle By  Jason Farago Sept. 29, 2016 When you’re hot you’re hot — and Jean Dubuffet is ablaze. “Dubuffet Drawings, 1935–1962,” a hefty and insightful exhibition at the Morgan Library & Museum, is the fourth here in less than two years to examine the Frenchman’s rough, unrefined, war-scarred creations, and his advocacy of art from outside the mainstream. The Museum of Modern Art’s excellent “Soul of the Underground” concentrated on the technical processes Dubuffet used for his disquieting prints and impressions. The American Folk Art Museum last fall presented 200 works from Dubuffet’s own collection of Art Brut — objects made by untrained or nonprofessional artists. Earlier this year, a significant show at Acquavella Galleries on the Upper East Side covered about the same period as this one: from the hardships of World War II to the booming first years of France’s Fifth Republic. Image “Four Figures,” gouache with incising on coarse sandpaper, 1946. Credit 2016 Jean Dubuffet/Artists Rights Society (ARS), New York / ADAGP, Paris; Richard and Mary L. Gray and the Gray Collection Trust The Morgan’s show, which is as strong as all of its predecessors, bills itself as an exhibition of drawings. But Dubuffet frustrates distinctions among mediums; frustrating distinctions was his stock in trade. You’ll therefore also find works that, though scaled to the intimate proportions of drawing, get more complicated than ink on rag: assemblages of printed and sliced papers, say, or collages of butterfly wings. (The current exhibition is curated by the Morgan’s Isabelle Dervaux. It travels to the Hammer Museum in Los Angeles next year.) Dubuffet came late to art. Though he took a few painting classes after 1918, he spent much of his youth working in the wine trade, and didn’t get serious about art until his early 40s. He made close observations and sketches of subway riders in occupied Paris, but the quartet of gouaches that resulted pictures commuters in a childlike, almost demented fashion. The commuters have big eyes, sickly green faces and cartoonish, intentionally repetitive expressions of isolation; the men wear zany B-shaped hats, whose double humps call to mind Bactrian camels. Look in the corner of one of these subway scenes and you’ll find the words “Rauchen verboten”: no smoking, in German. This is a city of privation and suspicion, but the commute must go on. Image Jean Dubuffet’s “Portrait of Jean Paulhan,” butterfly wings and ink on paper, from 1955. Credit 2016 Jean Dubuffet/Artists Rights Society (ARS), New York/ADAGP, Paris; Collection of Judy and Marc Herzstein Other colorful gouaches Dubuffet painted before the Liberation — of a jazz club, a Paris street scene or cyclists in the countryside — don’t rise to the weird standard of his métro paintings, and their simplified, obdurate forms may put you more in mind of a Sunday painter than a man contesting hierarchies of style. To see what Dubuffet was really up to, stick with the black-and-white works on paper, which the artist frequently scratched and abraded. A bare-breasted, shellshocked woman emerges from a field of scruffy black; the painting is called “Coiffure Pour Dame,” identifying the setting as the world’s most depressing beauty salon. A majestically uncanny scene of four smiling men is done on sandpaper: Dubuffet painted the figures in white, then incised their big eyes and buck teeth with an unknown sharp object. He also employed sgraffito — scratching through a layer of paint to reveal what lies beneath — for a series of portraits, done just after the war, whose dark humanism rhymes with the existentialist philosophy then in fashion in the cafes of Saint-Germain. The poet Henri Michaux is pictured with pinched lips and jug ears within a torrent of white scratches. Paul Léautaud , a vituperative theater critic, wears a dead-simple crescent frown and has his limbs extended in an X shape, as if crucified while doing jumping jacks. Some of these portraits may remind you of the troubled humanoids of Alberto Giacometti, though other colleagues in Paris were also using rough surfaces and repetitive mark-making to evoke postwar trauma, among them Jean Fautrier (1898–1964) and the German émigré known as Wols (1913-1951). Image The Swindle, a gouache from 1962. The anomie and colorlessness of Dubuffet’s drawings in the years after the Liberation were hardly baseless. Winters were bitter; coal was hard to come by. A sun-starved Dubuffet, in 1947, made the first of three trips to Algeria — and there, like Henri Matisse and Raoul Dufy before him, the Frenchman married avant-garde painting techniques to an essentialism that might now make you wince. Among the Bedouins of the Algerian Sahara, Dubuffet tried blending powdered pigment with a kind of glue. The viscous colors provided the sticky, sickly substrate for images of goatherds, palm trees and a Bedouin with a headdress patterned like a spider’s web, whose teeth are six parallel white gashes. As with his paintings and drawings in wartime Paris, the political realities of colonial North Africa barely intrude. But easy as it now is to ding Dubuffet for exoticism, it’s worth remembering how committed the Frenchman was to dismantling hierarchies of artistic merit — and how his gaze on Arab societies formed part of a larger contestation of European pre-eminence. Between his three sojourns in North Africa, Dubuffet was in Switzerland, where he was collecting the awkward, engaging art brut shown at the Folk Art Museum last year. He favored “anything produced by persons unscathed by artistic culture,” as he wrote in his 1949 essay “Art Brut in Preference to the Cultural Arts.” And art from outside the mainstream — non-Western art, outsider art, and art by children — was critical to Dubuffet’s own attack on distinctions in drawing and painting. Image “Jazz,” gouache and brush and ink, 1943. Dubuffet’s works from the 1950s are more jocular and sprightlier than his sludgy images from wartime and the Liberation. In a series of nudes, done in pen or with watercolor, women smile but appear flattened out, like dough under a rolling pin. Those butterfly wings are glued to boards to create both an indistinct portrait of Jean Paulhan, the literary critic and a fellow Art Brut supporter, as well as allover abstractions that foreshadow Damien Hirst’s butterfly works, though with none of the British artist’s bombast. Boisterous, convoluted networks of lines and bubbles echo the repetitive mark-making Dubuffet saw in the art of the mentally ill, though only some actually required a similar amount of labor. Dubuffet conceived of shortcut techniques to intricacy, such as slathering ink on a piece of crumpled foil, then pressing it to paper to create an impression recalling the moon’s surface. It’s a way of frustrating expectations of artistic mastery; it’s also a bit of a ruse. Image “Léautaud With White Scratches,” India ink on scratchboard, 1946. Credit 2016 Jean Dubuffet/Artists Rights Society (ARS), New York / ADAGP, Paris; Collection of Judy and Marc Herzstein Funny that this show cuts off before Dubuffet’s hourloupes , the tightly locked doodles of blue and red that he first developed in 1962 and stuck with for a decade after that. The MoMA and Acquavella shows excluded them, too. Perhaps the recent fashion for early Dubuffet is just a matter of taste — and these days, elite taste runs to all things unrefined. But Dubuffet’s greatness lies in his frustration of elite tastes. Maybe his later, meandering drawings, absent here, have become the true outsiders. “Dubuffet Drawings, 1935- 1962” runs through Jan. 2 at the Morgan Library & Museum, 225 Madison Avenue, at 36th Street, Manhattan; 212-685-0008, themorgan.org.  A version of this article appears in print on , on Page C 26 of the New York edition with the headline: Art of Frustration, No Matter the Form . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              