   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Weddings Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Margherita Devine, Giles Robertson Image Credit John Ashbourne Oct. 8, 2017 Margherita Wisdom Devine and Giles William James Robertson were married Oct. 7 at Lincoln’s Inn Chapel in London. The Venerable Sheila Watson, a priest ordained by the Church of England, officiated. Ms. Devine, 29, is a London-based freelance copywriter and product namer. She graduated with first class honors from McGill University, and received a master’s degree in classics from the University of Cambridge. She is a daughter of Alessandra H. Devine of New York and Henry C. Devine of Boston. The bride’s father retired as an adjunct professor of finance at Boston University. Her mother is a licensed associate broker in New York for Stribling & Associates. The bride is also a stepdaughter of Catherine Racowsky, a professor of obstetrics, gynecology and reproductive biology at Harvard Medical School, and Patrick B. Dorsey, who retired as general counsel for Tiffany & Company, in New York. Ms. Devine is also the granddaughter of the late William Hillman, who was chief of foreign correspondents for the Hearst Newspapers and general European manager for the International News Service. He served as aide and confidant of President Harry S. Truman and is the author of “Mr. President,” a collection of Mr. Truman’s letters, papers and opinions. Mr. Robertson, also 29, is a barrister in London at Fountain Court Chambers, and practices commercial law. He graduated with first class honors from Christ’s College, University of Cambridge in England. He is the son of Catharine A.E. Robertson and James Robertson of London. The groom’s mother retired as a partner in Hewitt, Woollacott & Chown, a London law firm. His father, who is retired, worked as a chartered accountant at Ernst & Young in London. The couple met in 2012 in London through mutual friends from the Cambridge Union, a debating and free speech society at the university. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page ST 16 of the New York edition with the headline: Margherita Devine,  Giles Robertson . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              