   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Politics Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Carly Fiorina Emerges as a G.O.P. Weapon Against ‘War on Women’ Charge Image Many Republicans are looking anew at Carly Fiorina, who rose from being a secretary to running the giant technology company Hewlett-Packard. Credit Eric Thayer for The New York Times By  Amy Chozick and Trip Gabriel Aug. 12, 2015 This week, Donald J. Trump said that listening to Carly Fiorina , the only woman competing for the Republican presidential nomination, gave him “a massive headache.” It was music to Mrs. Fiorina’s ears. For months, the former Hewlett-Packard executive has tried to gain traction by pointedly attacking Hillary Rodham Clinton . But Mrs. Fiorina’s candidacy did not start to sizzle until her performance at last week’s second-tier Republican debate , where viewers realized that as the sole woman in a 17-candidate primary field, she was singularly qualified to stand up to Mr. Trump. It is not a role Mrs. Fiorina necessarily wants to emphasize. “I don’t spend very much of my campaign time talking or thinking about Donald Trump,” she said in an interview Wednesday. But it is one she has embraced with the same fervor that she has employed against Mrs. Clinton, the Democratic Party front-runner. “Women understood” that Mr. Trump’s attack the day after the debate on the Fox News anchor Megyn Kelly, making a reference to bleeding that many people thought was an allusion to menstruation, was sexist, Mrs. Fiorina told a visibly squeamish Jake Tapper of CNN. “I’ve had lots of men imply that I was unfit for decision-making because maybe I was having my period. So I’ll say it, O.K?” What Carly Fiorina Would Need to Do to Win Carly Fiorina is entering the race for the Republican nomination for president. Here is a look at what she will need to do if she hopes to win. May 4, 2015 In a crowded Republican field, Mrs. Fiorina has delivered the most forceful and succinct denunciation of Mr. Trump’s comments, which sent a shudder through a party concerned that it would reinforce perceptions that it was increasingly out of touch with female voters. Now, many Republicans, preparing to potentially confront Mrs. Clinton in a general election, are looking anew at Mrs. Fiorina, who rose from being a secretary to running the giant technology company HP, as the party’s weapon to counter the perception that it is waging a “war on women.” “People feel Carly has clearly demonstrated she is a very powerful operator, has a lot of strengths of conviction and is willing to take Hillary — and now even Trump — on very directly,” said Katie Packer Gage, a political strategist who focuses on helping Republicans connect with women. Asked whether she was willing to play the role of telegenic poster girl of the Republican presidential field, Mrs. Fiorina said, “I know Hillary Clinton wants to paint the entire Republican Party with the broad brush of Donald Trump’s comments, but it’s not clear to me that Donald Trump is a Republican.” Even Republicans who have embraced Mrs. Fiorina in recent days — and expect her to earn a place in the top tier at the next debate on Sept. 16 — privately concur she is an imperfect candidate. A single previous campaign, for the United States Senate from California in 2010, ended in a nearly double-digit defeat. Her corporate resume is notable for her firing as chief executive of HP — a humiliation that Mrs. Fiorina tries to explain as the price of bold leadership. She is already being pressed about the 30,000 layoffs at HP under her watch. Similar criticism wounded Mitt Romney, the 2012 Republican nominee, whose career at Bain — and its deals that resulted in layoffs — exposed him to Democratic attacks that he did not care about the middle class. Asked about the layoffs while she was chief executive, Mrs. Fiorina said she would take a similar approach to the federal government. “I do think there are a lot of people who think it would be a good thing if the federal government were more effective, more efficient and a lot less bloated,” she said. It is unclear how much her message will resonate with women. Mrs. Fiorina once said her experience proved the glass ceiling was obsolete, and she has defined feminism as “a left-leaning political ideology” that pits “women against men” and is “used as a political weapon to win elections.” Who Is Running for President? Donald J. Trump officially accepted the Republican party's nomination on July 22. Hillary Clinton was officially nominated on July 26 at the Democratic Convention. Jan. 30, 2015 In the interview, Mrs. Fiorina said, “As a woman I am insulted when I hear somebody talk about ‘women’s issues,’ ” adding, “Every issue is a women’s issue.” Early in her candidacy Mrs. Fiorina, whose corporate leadership style has been described as brash, proved eager to sharply criticize Mrs. Clinton, while other candidates hesitated. Her gender provided a shield from what many Republicans assumed would be repercussions against a man attacking Mrs. Clinton so early and often. The attention earned Mrs. Fiorina a special kind of support: donations from Republicans who did not consider her their first choice, but who viewed her as an important voice on a male-dominated stage. These included a “ super PAC ” that has been supporting Senator Ted Cruz of Texas, which gave $500,000 to a “super PAC” backing Mrs. Fiorina. At least for now, Mrs. Fiorina said she was fine being a second choice. “I have heard donors say, ‘You know, I’m supporting someone else but I want to be supportive of you, as well,’ ” she said. Image Carly Fiorina after the Republican debate for the seven trailing candidates last week in Cleveland. Credit Eric Thayer for The New York Times Now, strategists seeing no probable path for Mrs. Fiorina to win the nomination said she stood to benefit, with the potential to weaken Mr. Trump. “Donors have looked at her as the answer to Hillary, but I think a lot more donors will now see her as the answer to Donald Trump,” said Kellyanne Conway, a Republican strategist. Mrs. Fiorina said her campaign was seeing an “uptick” in donations, but declined to give specifics. Early on, Mrs. Fiorina decided to outsource much of the traditionally expensive work of campaigning, like field organizing, to a “super PAC” that has already raised $3 million for her. The campaign is bare bones, with no paid pollsters or senior strategists. Mrs. Fiorina writes all of her own speeches, including the zingers against Mrs. Clinton, which are repeated like bullet-points of a corporate PowerPoint presentation. She also handles her own debate preparations. In Cleveland, she said Mrs. Clinton “lies about Benghazi” and “lies about her emails,” two talking points she repeated in a testy post-debate exchange with the MSNBC host Chris Matthews. “How many of you would like to see me debate Hillary Clinton?” she asked to roars of approval at a campaign stop in South Carolina on Sunday. A spokeswoman for Mrs. Clinton, Jennifer Palmieri, called Mrs. Fiorina’s attacks on Mrs. Clinton in the debate “particularly devoid of substance.” After the debate, Mrs. Fiorina, 60, traveled to a gathering of conservative activists in Atlanta over the weekend, where she received standing ovations. “The crowds are bigger. People are excited,” Mrs. Fiorina said. Mrs. Fiorina “leads on Trump and the others know they can follow,” said Erick Erickson of RedState.com., the organizer of the event. “I think Carly emboldens them to take action.” Mrs. Fiorina, an adherent of the Silicon Valley meritocracy where she spent most of her career, believes that while employers cannot discriminate based on gender, they should be able to decide how much employees are paid . She is against federally mandated paid maternity leave, a position the Democratic National Committee portrayed as being “worse than the maternity leave policy in war-torn Afghanistan.” Mrs. Fiorina does not deny that sexism has tracked her throughout her political and business career when, she has said, “you’re either a bimbo or you’re the other b-word.” The optimism among some Republicans that they have found their weapon against the war on women charge could prove short-lived. A Democratic group supporting Mrs. Clinton has already started to assemble research on her corporate career to portray Mrs. Fiorina as a cold and ineffective titan. “There will be a lot more scrutiny on her and she’s going to have to make her case in a bit more detail,” said Ms. Gage, the Republican strategist. “Why her?”  Find out what you need to know about the 2016 presidential race today, and get politics news updates via Facebook , Twitter and the First Draft newsletter . A version of this article appears in print on , on Page A 1 of the New York edition with the headline: Trump’s Remarks Pull Fiorina From Outer Reach of G.O.P. Pack . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Related Coverage From the Right, a New Slur for G.O.P. Candidates Aug. 13, 2015 Image Evoking Donald Trump, Ted Cruz Grabs for the Limelight During Southern Tour Aug. 12, 2015 Image Scott Walker Approves Public Funding of Basketball Arena Aug. 12, 2015 Image Show All Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              