   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Business Day Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by A Milestone for Warren Buffett, and Profits for Investors Image Berkshire Hathaway shareholders can buy souvenirs of Warren Buffett’s half-century at the helm. Credit Nati Harnik/Associated Press By  Reuters May 1, 2015 OMAHA — Berkshire Hathaway, Warren E. Buffett’s holding company reported on Friday that first-quarter profit rose 10 percent and operating results easily beat forecasts, helped by its railroad and insurance businesses and gains from derivatives. Results were released one day before Berkshire’s annual meeting in Omaha, where shareholders are expected to celebrate Mr. Buffett’s 50th anniversary at Berkshire’s helm. Mr. Buffett and Charlie Munger, Berkshire’s vice chairman, will answer questions for five hours at the meeting, which is expected to draw more than 40,000 shareholders. It is part of a weekend of events throughout Omaha that Mr. Buffett calls Woodstock for Capitalists. Profit from the Burlington Northern Santa Fe railroad totaled $1.05 billion, up 44 percent from a year earlier, when bad weather and congestion led to what Berkshire called “substandard” service that left many customers unhappy. Berkshire attributed the better performance this year to increased capacity, new equipment and other upgrades made as part of a $6 billion capital improvement program that will continue this year. Berkshire has more than 80 operating companies in insurance, energy, food, railroad and other sectors, and owns more than $115 billion of stocks. Mr. Buffett took control of Berkshire 50 years ago and began reshaping it into a conglomerate. Many of those subsidiaries are offering some special trinkets for shareholders to buy. Fruit of the Loom has “Berky” boxers and bras. The Richline Group offers a gold Warren Buffett watch, bracelets and a commemorative coin. And Berkshire’s Brooks Running subsidiary shows a limited-edition shoe with a cartoon depiction of Mr. Buffett inside. Net income rose to $5.16 billion, or $3,143 a share, from $4.71 billion, or $2,862 a share, a year earlier. Quarterly operating profit increased 20 percent to $4.24 billion, or $2,583 per share, from $3.53 billion, or $2,149. Analysts on average expected operating profit of about $2,373 a share, according to Thomson Reuters I/B/E/S. Revenue rose 7 percent to $48.64 billion. Book value per share, Mr. Buffett’s preferred measure of growth, rose 0.5 percent from year-end to $146,963. Major stock holdings include American Express, Coca-Cola, IBM and Wells Fargo. Berkshire also ended the quarter with $63.71 billion in cash. In Friday trading, Berkshire Class A shares closed up $2,400 at $215,800, and its Class B shares rose $2.15 to $143.36. The shares are about 6 percent below their record highs set last Dec. 8. Berkshire’s market value is roughly $355 billion, ranking fifth among publicly traded American companies. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page B 3 of the New York edition with the headline: A Milestone for Buffett, and Profits for Investors . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              