   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Joshua Newman, a Fitness Entrepreneur, Sentenced to 41 Months in Prison Image A CrossFit gym in Manhattan. Mr. Newman was a founder of a CrossFit center there and later created a website for another fitness program, Composite Fitness. Credit Devin Yalkin for The New York Times By  Matthew Goldstein June 27, 2017 Joshua B. Newman, a Yale University graduate turned personal fitness entrepreneur, was sentenced on Tuesday to more than three years in a federal prison for bilking 30 investors out of more than $3 million. Mr. Newman, 37, was sentenced just over two years after federal authorities had charged him with duping those investors, many of whom were either Yale alumni or people who had come to know him at a CrossFit training center in New York. Judge William H. Walls of the Federal District Court in Newark imposed a sentence of 41 months followed by three years of court supervision, after Mr. Newman had addressed the court and said he was sorry for his actions. A number of Mr. Newman’s family members were in the courtroom as were an investor who said he lived in Puerto Rico and a lawyer who represents several other investors. “Josh acknowledged he came from privilege and he blew it,” said Michael Stolper, the lawyer who represents 11 investors. “I think justice was served.” Mr. Newman’s business failures and allegations that he had failed to repay debts to investors were first reported by The New York Times in May 2015. He is scheduled to report to prison on Aug. 28. “Although today’s sentence disappoints us, we have complete faith that Josh shall return to society as a true asset to his community,” said Priya Chaudhry, a lawyer who represented Mr. Newman along with Eric Kanefsky. “Josh is lucky to have many gifts, including resilience.” Image Joshua B. Newman in a YouTube video for CrossFit NYC. Mr. Newman intends to repay his victims and has accepted full responsibility for his actions, Ms. Chaudhry said. Raised in Silicon Valley, Mr. Newman graduated from Palo Alto High School in 1997, just as the first internet start-up boom was taking hold. At Yale, Mr. Newman majored in cognitive science, a field that combines elements of computer science, neuroscience and psychology. By his junior year, Mr. Newman has said, he was a managing partner in the Silicon Ivy Venture Fund, which provided seed money to start-ups backed by college students. Even before he graduated, Mr. Newman was featured in an April 2000 article in The Wall Street Journal about dorm room venture capitalists. He seemed to have a bright future, but things went wrong when a small film production company he had started, Cyan Pictures, ran into financial trouble and accumulated big debts that would dog Mr. Newman for years. He then tried his hand at CrossFit, an intensive workout regimen, and became an outspoken devotee . He was a founder of a large, independently owned CrossFit center in Manhattan. But Mr. Newman got in trouble when he began raising money to finance another CrossFit center. Federal prosecutors contend much of the money he raised for that venture and others went either to his personal use or to the investors in his failed movie production company. Mr. Newman is not affiliated with CrossFit Inc., a fitness consulting firm based in Washington. Centers using the CrossFit brand name are independently run. Even after he pleaded guilty to one count of wire fraud in March 2016, Mr. Newman continued to posit himself as an entrepreneur. He created a website for a new fitness and training program called Composite Fitness. And he continued to post messages on his blog. His last message was posted on Monday under the headline: “Penance.” The brief post was a quotation from Joseph J. Ellis, the American historian and writer: “And the only thing to do with a sin is to confess, do penance and then, after some kind of decent interval, ask for forgiveness.” A version of this article appears in print on , on Page B 4 of the New York edition with the headline: Fitness Entrepreneur Sentenced to 41 Months in Prison for Wire Fraud . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Related Coverage Yale Graduate Who Promoted CrossFit Ventures Is Arrested May 21, 2015 Image Fitness Entrepreneur Pleads Guilty in Wire Fraud Case March 23, 2016 Image Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              