   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Music Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Critic's Notebook How David Bowie Challenged MTV on Race Image David Bowie at Madison Square Garden in 1976. Credit Allan Tannenbaum/Getty Images By  Wesley Morris Jan. 13, 2016 David Bowie was always going somewhere — Africa, Japan, outer space, “the hinterland, the hinterland” (from “Red Sails”), up, down, in, out, across. One wavelet of Internet tributes paid to Mr. Bowie after his death on Sunday recalled a trip he took to a hotel room, in 1983, to pick a bone with MTV . Futzing, at first, with his sock, he mentions to the V.J. Mark Goodman that the network, which was about two years old, barely played black artists: “The only few black artists that one does see are on about 2:30 in the morning.” Mr. Goodman explains: “We have to try and do what we think not only New York and Los Angeles will appreciate but also Poughkeepsie or Midwest. Pick some town in the Midwest that would be scared to death by Prince — which we’re playing — or a string of other black faces.” Mr. Goodman observes that more white artists are playing so-called black music, which should make that music more palatable to the network’s white audience. But in kicking the can down the road, he missed an aspect of Mr. Bowie’s point: Black artists matter to black people, too. The exchange is refreshing for its candor, sobering for its continued relevance and useful for what it says about Mr. Bowie’s sense of social awareness. As a self-concocted alien, he was drawn to other people’s otherness. Yet no matter how otherworldly and genderless he made himself, Mr. Bowie was aware that he was a white man. For MTV, he leveraged it. As a performer, he dramatized it. By the time of that MTV interview, Mr. Bowie had rerouted rock ’n’ roll toward R&B with the slink of “Young Americans,” his 1975 album whose high point isn’t the not-as-jaunty-as-it-sounds title song but the aptly named “Fascination,” some disco-dusted jubilation that he wrote with a young, unknown Luther Vandross. Mr. Bowie had affixed an obviously blacker facade. Somewhat sheepish, he quickly labeled this foray “plastic soul,” a pejorative designation meant, in part perhaps, to insulate him from charges of inauthenticity. (To more than one black artist, it was Mick Jagger who was guiltiest of that charge.) But the phrase also suggested that anything Mr. Bowie sang could be construed as soulful. To that end, he appeared on “Soul Train” in 1975, a rare invitation extended to a white artist. During the interview with the host, Don Cornelius, a man in the audience asked Mr. Bowie when he got into soul music, and the partial, unserious answer — “We have street corners in London” — probably made it less fun to dance as he lip synced “Golden Years.” The next year, in a Playboy interview , Mr. Bowie dismissed “Young Americans” as the “squashed remains of ethnic music as it survives in the age of Muzak rock.” Perhaps as repentance, he spent his “Station to Station” tour in 1976 performing as an Aryan wraith he called the Thin White Duke. His tragically feeble Duke seemed like cultural atonement not only for his own sins (as he perceived them, anyway) but also for the muscular certainty of John Wayne’s Duke. Mr. Bowie was queering both masculinity and whiteness. In appearance, however, Mr. Bowie was a drug-den Frank Sinatra. During this period, he was often high and let the persona carry him away. As the Duke, Mr. Bowie made statements about fascism and Nazi gestures and had to recant those, too. What seemed like repentance was actually a doubling down. By the early 1980s, he’d recovered his health and resumed making sense. He hooked up with the producer Nile Rodgers for “Let’s Dance,” an album that isn’t as awkwardly, overpoweringly black, like much of “Young Americans.” Mr. Rodgers brings some pastiche to the music and an open, hard sound that clears a path for some of Mr. Bowie’s bigger, sexier singing. Video David Bowie had an indelible effect on music videos as a storytelling method. From “John, I’m Only Dancing” in 1972 to “Lazarus” just last week, Bowie’s experimentation helped make music videos what they are. Published On Jan. 11, 2016 Credit Image by Floria Sigismondi, via Agence France-Presse — Getty Images “Let’s Dance” was his first album of the MTV era (and still his best-selling studio recording), and you can sense that he wanted to use his stardom — and his race — to mock the network’s priorities. If it wouldn’t play nonwhite artists, he’d stock his videos with nonwhite people. The video is shot from the point of view of an aboriginal couple (Terry Roberts and Joelene King) in New South Wales, Australia. Directed by David Mallet, a comically prolific music-video surrealist, it hocks an impressionistic loogie at imperialism. She scrubs floors. He works in a factory. And the two share a metaphorical daydream in which they take a stroll through a mall, buy jewelry with an upside down American Express card, hit the beach, paint art on a museum wall and go for a five-star dinner, only to reject it all by stomping on the red shoes mentioned in the song, which here evoke cinema’s other fantastical red shoes — from Dorothy’s to the maniacal ones of Michael Powell and Emeric Pressburger . And where’s Mr. Bowie? When he’s not being a version of the Thin White Duke, performing in a dusty watering hole and hovering in parts of the frame, he’s playing a fussy suit on the factory floor — he’s The Man. In the last shots, he’s in the desert vamping a guitar solo (that Stevie Ray Vaughan actually played). Eventually, a large, black silhouette of a hand is superimposed over him. That’s one of his first appearances on MTV: ghostly, patriarchal, negated. Mr. Mallet’s video for the album’s second single , “China Girl,” was more charged, less straightforward and probably more daring as a result. Arguably, the song is about an interracial relationship that’s left the white guy paranoid from the guilty weight of history. In the video, Mr. Bowie frolics with the model Geeling Ng , who’s outfitted in various Asian costumes across time. They make funny faces meant to mock each other’s races and roll around on the beach, “From Here to Eternity”-style. He takes a bowl of rice off her hands and tosses it into the air. It feels too loaded to be purely silly. For one thing, there’s a desert scene that finds Mr. Bowie in top hat and tails, trailed by a man in a version of a communist officer’s uniform. Their walk ends when they get to Ms. Ng, who’s fallen over in the sand. Mr. Bowie points two fingers down at her, and she floats up until she’s on her knees, her head meeting his fingers, which are making an imaginary gun. After a couple of lightning-strike effects, he unfurls his hand and pets her head. Its reference point, colonial assassination, is shocking, but Mr. Mallet’s decision to run the scene backward and film it from a low angle makes the specific grisliness easier to miss. Horror is in the song, too. Mr. Bowie wrote “China Girl” with Iggy Pop for Mr. Pop’s 1977 album , “The Idiot.” Mr. Bowie’s cover has more theater. By the bridge, the sultry simmer of his voice has boiled over into panic. He sings, “I stumble into town just like a sacred cow/Visions of swastikas in my head/Plans for everyone/It’s in the white of my eyes.” The song peaked at No. 10 on the Billboard Hot 100. No. 10 . Has any other indictment of a kind of patriarchal psychosis ever charted nearly as high? But that was part of what Mr. Bowie got up to in the 1980s: playing nasty in movies like “Merry Christmas, Mr. Lawrence” and “Labyrinth”; having a campy wink at notions of white male power. Since his death — and well before it, too – Mr. Bowie has been hailed as a visionary. It’s true. Some of what he saw, he felt needed fixing. On that day in 1983, what needed fixing was both what MTV saw and what we saw on MTV. Mr. Bowie’s first videos for MTV play like cautionary tales for nonwhite artists: steer clear. But he envisioned the network’s power to shape the culture and wanted it done right. Maybe his approach to black music really was “plastic soul,” yet he used his position to demand integration for artists whose idea of soul was more concrete. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page C 2 of the New York edition with the headline: A Rebel’s Soul, Holding Sway . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Related Coverage Iggy Pop on David Bowie: ‘He Resurrected Me’ Jan. 13, 2016 Image After David Bowie’s Death, ‘Lazarus’ Holds New Meaning for Fans Jan. 13, 2016 Image Was He Gay, Bisexual or Bowie? Yes Jan. 13, 2016 Image Show All Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              