   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index New York Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by The Daily News Layoffs and Digital Shift May Signal the Tabloid Era’s End Image The New York Daily News is “the voice of the working people, the heart of New York,” Michael Daly, a former columnist for the newspaper, said. Credit Karsten Moran for The New York Times By  Alan Feuer Sept. 27, 2015 When it was over and the feature page was gone, dozens of reporters had been fired and the morning assignment editor was shown the door only minutes after handing out the morning’s first assignments, The Daily News — or what was left of it — was in a state of shock. For weeks the staff had known that layoffs might be coming, and when they did come, on Sept. 16, it was with the swiftness of a Soviet-era purge. Newsroom veterans were summoned into an office and told about a digitally driven corporate restructuring. Those outside the building were told their fates by phone — some while on vacation. One reporter was so left in the dark that when she got to work that day, there was already an intern in her seat. “It was not the normal thing with a few cuts here and there,” said one employee who was fired and who, like many, spoke on the condition of anonymity because his severance package had not yet been delivered. “This was a total repositioning of the product.” From The New York Herald to The New York Tribune (to say nothing of The New York Herald Tribune), newspapers have been dying in New York for nearly as long as they have been born. But to some journalists who have watched their share of these deaths, this month’s disembowelment of The Daily News seemed like something new. At the very least the job cuts meant that the recent attrition at newspapers across the country had finally arrived in force in the nation’s media capital. But it also suggested something deeper — about the city and the industry. Mortimer B. Zuckerman, the owner of The News, known for its crusades against municipal misconduct, was dismissing ace reporters while bolstering his global online platform. William D. Holiber, the chief executive, had also created a satellite operation, in New Jersey, with a mission in part to aggregate content from across the web and repackage it for The News’s own site. While both men promised that The Daily News would not give up its city-centric mandate, the shift toward a digital edition, which would read the same in Brooklyn and Bahrain, was the end of something. The News, after all, is the ultimate local paper, and the real-life model for Clark Kent’s Daily Planet. If focusing on the Internet was not the end of the tabloid itself, then perhaps it was the end of the city’s tabloid era. Image Mortimer B. Zuckerman Credit Fred R. Conrad/The New York Times “The Daily News has always been a New York paper for New York people,” said Michael Daly, a former News columnist, who naturally now works at The Daily Beast, an online publication. “It’s been part of the city’s life in a way no other paper has been — or at least it was till now.” Since its founding in 1919, The News has occupied an inimitable niche, speaking to and for the city’s working class and offering a schizophrenic mix of titillating crime reportage and hard-hitting coverage of public issues. Unlike The New York Post, which has veered from left to right, the politics of The Daily News are flexibly centrist. And rather than portraying New York through the partisan divide between liberals and conservatives, The News has played up the more mythic rift between the city’s fiends and heroes. For almost a century this big-hearted, quasi-cartoon style was a recipe for success, and at one time, The News was the country’s largest mass-market newspaper. More recently, it has struggled at a time in which virtually all print publications have seen their circulations and advertising profits plummet and their once lucrative classified pages all but abandoned for online options like Craigslist . From its 1947 circulation peak of 2.4 million copies a day, The News now has a daily circulation of slightly more than 300,000, according to the Alliance for Audited Media, about 130,000 copies of which are single-copy newsstand sales. Only five years ago, The News was selling about 346,000 newsstand copies daily on a total circulation of 525,000. Given that the paper is said to lose between $20 million and $30 million a year (The Post, by comparison, has annual estimated losses of almost $100 million), Mr. Zuckerman put the paper up for sale in February, but after flirting with several suitors he withdrew it from the market last month. Though he and Mr. Holiber have searched for outside income, opening their printing plant to 80 publications and starting a company that does web design and social-media marketing, they said they were compelled to invest heavily in The News’s digital presence. “We’re focusing The News more and more on its online activities,” Mr. Zuckerman said in an interview last week, “because that’s where the audience is going. It’s a younger audience and that’s what advertisers want. If people don’t want horses and buggies anymore and they want to ride in automobiles, then you better damn well get into the auto business.” Image The Daily News has its main offices at 4 New York Plaza, center. Credit Karsten Moran for The New York Times It is hardly news that newspapers everywhere are grappling with the challenges of the Internet, but the ways in which The Daily News has approached this wrestling match have left some members of its staff worried that the paper has betrayed its mission in exchange for digital clicks. It was not just the bloodletting in the feature, sports and business pages, which, people noted, were some of the paper’s most beloved sections; several employees said that The News’s top executives, in their scramble for solutions, had made the paper more down-market and sensational — a tepid imitation of the Post. “The mantra in the building is web, web, web,” said one reporter who lost his job this month. “But they haven’t figured out how to monetize the web yet. And so it just gets trashier and trashier in an effort to juice the numbers.” Mr. Zuckerman insisted that The News would continue to cover the city with the same deep sourcing and doorstep reporting it has always used, not least because New York, he said, is a subject that intrigues the world. But in the wake of the layoffs, in tearful and occasionally drunken conversations, his troops expressed concern that the culture of the paper had irreparably changed. “When I first got to The News, it was about all reporting and writing, but now it’s about self-promotion,” said one former veteran reporter. “I can’t remember the last time someone on the staff sent a note saying, ‘Hey, good piece.’ What they say now is, ‘Hey, we broke the March record for page views!’ ” While one can scarcely ascribe this trend to The News, that it has infiltrated an institution that by tradition was built on gin and shoe leather raises the question of just how many of the young web surfers at Mr. Holiber’s aggregation shop would recognize the names Pete Hamill or Jimmy Breslin (hint: check Google). “That’s all over and done with,” Mr. Hamill said the other day when asked about the city’s tabloid epoch. “I looked at The News’s website today and you know what the lead was? O.J. Simpson. The pope’s in town. John Boehner just quit. And they lead with O. J.? These jerks piss me off.” That, in case you missed it, was tabloid culture: caustic anger in the service of civic ideals. It could be said that The Daily News is, or was, the last vestige of that culture in New York. The New York Times has its own empyrean style and several years ago ended its stand-alone New York section, moving local coverage into the A section, with the paper’s national and foreign reports. As for The Post, it is hard to know what the paper cares about aside from sex, gossip and the shifting whims of its owner, Rupert Murdoch. But for many years, The Daily News, available to actual New Yorkers, in their neighborhoods, offered up a seven-day feast of sweet and savory stories: meaty police reporting, salty columns on City Hall, fat analyses of the Mets’ starting pitchers and, for dessert, a smattering of cheesecake shots of models and celebrities. “All that corny stuff about The News — how it’s the voice of the working people, the heart of New York — it’s all basically true,” Mr. Daly, the former columnist, said. “Every day it would prove that the common man and common woman weren’t so common. That actually, commonness is found more often among the rich and that distinction was found more often among the people who would buy The Daily News.” “If you’ve got $1.25,” he finally said, “it’s still a helluva paper.” Correction :  An article on Monday about changes at The Daily News in New York misstated the newspaper’s peak daily circulation. It was 2.4 million in 1947, not nearly one million. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page A 18 of the New York edition with the headline: Layoffs and Digital Shift at The Daily News May Signal the Tabloid Era’s End . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Related Coverage Colin Myler, Top Editor, Is Leaving Daily News Sept. 11, 2015 Image Daily News Struggles to Find Its Identity After Sale Is Called Off Aug. 21, 2015 Image Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              