   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index New York Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by As Democrats Regroup, Spotlight Turns to New Jersey Governor’s Race Image Philip D. Murphy campaigned in Union City, N.J., on Tuesday in the hours before his victory in the Democratic primary for governor. Credit Todd Heisler/The New York Times By  Nick Corasaniti June 9, 2017 UNION CITY, N.J. — The door cracked open slightly, about as far as the chain lock allowed, and Philip D. Murphy hunched over to peer inside. Hours before decisively winning the Democratic primary election for governor of New Jersey on Tuesday, Mr. Murphy was hustling through a final blitz of a door-knocking, get-out-the-vote effort in this overwhelmingly Hispanic city . Wrapping up his assigned blocks in under 20 minutes, he took in the Spanish being shouted from the windows. “Do you think there’s some trepidation with these families opening their door given the age of Donald Trump and deportation?” he asked, addressing no one in particular. While a handful of congressional and mayoral special elections have attracted outsize national attention, Mr. Murphy is vying for one of the two big statewide electoral prizes this year following Mr. Trump’s victory. In a party searching for direction in the populist era sparked by Mr. Trump, Mr. Murphy is something of a throwback to the pre-Occupy Wall Street period. A former Goldman Sachs banker who won his first political job — ambassador to Germany — by raising millions of dollars for the Democratic Party, he looks at first glance more like a traditional Democrat. As he seeks to navigate a party confronting anti-Wall Street populism and the liberalism embodied by Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont, Mr. Murphy, 59, has opted to steer an uneasy course, somewhere to the left of Hillary Clinton but bearing right of Mr. Sanders. “I think we’ve done a really good job of avoiding that civil war almost entirely,” he said in an interview. Still, New Jersey, which hosts one of just two statewide elections in 2017, is not necessarily the best barometer of the party’s future. Democratic voters significantly outnumber their Republican counterparts, Mrs. Clinton easily beat Mr. Trump here, and Mr. Murphy’s November opponent, Kim Guadagno, the lieutenant governor, must deal with the fact that she served under Chris Christie, who is leaving office as one of the most unpopular governors in recent times. No matter how he frames his campaign, or whether his 23-year tenure at Goldman Sachs hurts him among liberal voters, Mr. Murphy enjoys a clear advantage in what is not considered a swing state. As for many Democrats in solidly blue territory, Mr. Murphy has seized on Mr. Trump as the ultimate rationale to cast a vote. One more Democratic governor, he tells crowds, can be a check to an out-of-control White House on issues like immigration and the environment. Other Democrats have also sought to elevate the significance of the New Jersey race. “The American people are with us, we just got to start talking to them again, and this is the man who knows how to do it,” former Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. said at a rally for Mr. Murphy. “This is a man who will not only lead New Jersey, he will help lead America.” On Tuesday, Mr. Murphy invited this reporter to shadow him as it became clear that he would become the Democratic nominee. Throughout the day, his BlackBerry buzzed incessantly with texts and emails from national political figures, including John D. Podesta, the former chairman of the Clinton campaign. At night, as Mr. Murphy was winding his way through a hotel kitchen toward the stage to deliver his victory speech, he received a congratulatory call from another major Democratic figure, Gov. Terry McAuliffe of Virginia. The next morning, as he made thank-you calls to mayors and county leaders, he fielded calls of advice and support from former President Barack Obama and Mr. Biden, and had a long phone conversation with Mrs. Clinton. Though Mr. Murphy’s views lean progressive, he tempers some of the more idealistic elements of the platform with his state’s budget realities. Health care is a “right,” he said, without missing a beat. But probably more doable at the federal level. “The problem is in New Jersey or at any state level, maybe you’ve seen different math than I have, but it’s jaw-droppingly expensive,” he said referring to health care. “Are we open to it at the state level? Absolutely. But it’s billions of dollars a year.” The same goes for education. He embraces fundamental progressive ideas, like universal preschool and tuition-free community college. But only once the economy improves. “If we are able to grow at this rate, and find these sources, we’re left with surpluses,” he said, explaining the economic expansion he believes will take place under his policies. “So we want to also take that and the first steps toward phasing in universal pre-K and free community college.” Mr. Murphy’s campaign is filled with big promises and occasional murky financing to back it up. He wants to fully fund the state’s pension liability, provide public schools all the state aid they are due and pay down health care liabilities for state workers, all of which are a large part of the state’s $35 billion debt . He says that he can pay for this in part by raising taxes on the wealthy, closing corporate loopholes, and legalizing and taxing marijuana. That combination would yield just over $1 billion, according to reports , while the balance would come from the rosy economic outlook Mr. Murphy says his policies will generate. Running alongside his progressive streak is a degree of pragmatism. He counts Lyndon B. Johnson as a political role model, along with Robert F. Kennedy. He admires Mr. Kennedy for his “calls to service,” and Mr. Johnson for his accomplishments. “All that ideology is well and good, but Lyndon Johnson got stuff done,” he said. “This state needs a leader who not only stands for the right things but gets stuff done.” That’s why he has made what he considers his most tangible goals the priority of his potential first days in office. Those include fulfilling the state’s $7.5 million commitment to Planned Parenthood, which he says is a modest sum of money, and signing into law a bill in the Democratic-controlled Legislature that would strengthen gun control. But at the top of Mr. Murphy’s list is addressing New Jersey’s last-place ranking among states in the amount of federal money it receives compared with the taxes it sends to Washington. He believes that can be dealt with by working more closely with the state’s congressional delegation. Image Kim Guadagno, the lieutenant governor, who won the Republican primary for governor in New Jersey, was joined on Tuesday in West Long Branch, N. J., by Joe Piscopo, a radio host; her son Michael; and Shaun Golden, the Monmouth County sheriff. Credit Hiroko Masuike/The New York Times He’s also prepared to use a potential bully pulpit to try to help turn some of the vulnerable Republican seats in the state to Democrats in 2018. “MacArthur and Rodney, I mean these guys know better, and they think they can get away with being one thing in New Jersey and another in Washington,” he said, referring to Representatives Tom MacArthur and Rodney Frelinghuysen, adding, “These guys have to pay a political price for the votes they’ve taken.” Though his goal is to claim the State House in Trenton, Mr. Murphy is well aware of the bigger spotlight now shining on him, and he is projecting himself as a candidate not just with New Jersey credentials, but one who can speak to the country. As he practiced his speeches — one for victory and one for defeat — two hours before polls closed, he leaned over a chipped wooden lectern in a nondescript Newark hotel room to run a last-second addition to his speech by his staff. “I want to say something about Ramadan,” he said. “I want to say salaam aleikum.” His aides nodded in approval. “After I do the Dr. King ‘judge people from the inside,’ I’d say, ‘And in that respect, I want to wish all of our Muslim brothers and sisters tonight who are celebrating the month of Ramadan, salaam aleikum and Ramadan Mubarak.’” What went unmentioned in his speech was his tenure at Goldman Sachs, the investment bank often vilified by Mr. Sanders and the progressive movement. Mr. Murphy casts off the criticism of his tenure at the bank, which he retired from in 2003, as an obsession held by the news media and his opponents, and not by voters. He said he was surprised by the negative tone that came from his Democratic rivals late in the primary campaign. “It got nastier than I actually thought it would, honestly,” he said. “But I’ve not done this before so I’m probably the least qualified person to pass judgment on this.” Indeed, Ms. Guadagno immediately seized on his background as she started a “Main Street, not Wall Street” campaign swing across the state in the days after Tuesday’s election. How his tenure as a Wall Street banker plays out in the general election remains to be seen. Mr. Murphy promises that he will not be “changing my stripes” in the coming months, even though more than just the voters in New Jersey may be watching. As he practiced his speech, he paused again at a line describing when Mr. Obama named him ambassador to Germany in which he emphasized that “despite what Donald Trump thinks” Germany is “one of our most important and dependable allies in the world.” He turned to his top aides and, referring to Angela Merkel, the German chancellor, said, “I got the word to Merkel I was going to say that tonight if I won.” A version of this article appears in print on , on Page A 19 of the New York edition with the headline: A Spotlight on New Jersey as Democrats Look for Direction . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              