   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Television Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by What’s on Wednesday By  Kathryn Shattuck June 25, 2014 8 P.M. (ABC Family) YOUNG & HUNGRY Gabi (Emily Osment), a sassy food blogger hoping to become the personal chef of Josh (Jonathan Sadowski, above with Ms. Osment), a wealthy tech entrepreneur, must prepare a romantic meal for him and his girlfriend as a test to get the job. But when the dinner goes awry, Gabi transforms the disaster into a chance not only for employment but maybe even love. Ashley Tisdale is an executive producer of this new series, inspired by the musings of Gabi Moskowitz, the San Francisco food blogger behind Brokeass Gourmet. Annie Potts, Kym Whitley, Rex Lee and Aimee Carrero round out the cast. 8 P.M. (CBS) BIG BROTHER In this 16th edition, 16 houseguests live together in a dwelling outfitted with more than 50 cameras and nearly 100 microphones recording their every move around the clock. Each week they’ll vote someone out of the house. The last person standing wins $500,000. 8 P.M. (HGTV) COUSINS UNDERCOVER Anthony Carrino and John Colaneri, a.k.a. the Kitchen Cousins, rally neighborhoods around home renovation projects for beloved residents while each unsuspecting owner is whisked away on a trip. In this Season 2 premiere, they surprise a mother and police officer with a backyard retreat. 8 P.M. (Cooking) EXTRA VIRGIN The actress Debi Mazar and her husband, the musician Gabriele Corcos, head to Birdland to hear the jazz pianist and bandleader Arturo O’Farrill, who persuades Mr. Corcos to cook dinner for him in exchange for playing in Mr. O’Farrill’s next show. 8 P.M. (13, 49) FABULOUS FROGS In this “Nature” episode, David Attenborough analyzes the quirky behavior of some of the more than 5,000 species of frogs and toads. 9 P.M. (Esquire) BREW DOGS The Scottish-malt rebels James Watt and Martin Dickie journey across the United States on a mission to gain craft beer converts by celebrating local brews and devising their own, using regional ingredients. A second season begins as the men visit Durham, N.C., where they brew — while riding bicycles — the most caloric beer ever, a maple bacon ice cream stout. In “Best Bars in America,” at 10, the comedians Sean Patton and Jay Larson embark on a cross-country bar crawl inspired by Esquire magazine’s annual rundown of favorite watering holes. 9 P.M. (Bravo) MILLION DOLLAR LISTING MIAMI The real estate franchise heads south, where three agents try to cash in on a luxury market they say is hotter than ever. 9 P.M. (USA) SUITS Logan Sanders (Brendan Hines) forces Harvey (Gabriel Macht, right) to prove that his relationship with Mike (Patrick J. Adams) won’t get in the way of their takeover battle. The efforts of Louis (Rick Hoffman) to bond with his new colleague, Jeff Malone (D. B. Woodside) meanwhile prompts a misunderstanding. In “Graceland,” at 10, Mike (Aaron Tveit) tries to uncover the bus line that is smuggling contraband into the United States. 9 P.M. (13) THE CENTRAL PARK FIVE (2012) The directors Ken Burns, David McMahon and Sarah Burns revisit the case of the Central Park jogger, a 28-year-old white woman who was found in the park early on April 20, 1989, bound, gagged, nearly naked and nearly dead, and of the five black and Latino teenagers who were arrested. The film argues that the convictions, and the years that the defendants served for the attack, of which they were eventually absolved, constituted a second crime. Last week the men agreed to a settlement of about $40 million from New York City to resolve their civil rights suit. 10 P.M. (Science) THROUGH THE WORMHOLE WITH MORGAN FREEMAN Think the zombie craze is just a figment of screenwriters’ overactive imaginations? Think again. Here, scientists reveal new strains of viruses that are attacking humans every day, while explaining how easy it is for people to lose conscious control of their bodies. 10 P.M. (TV Land) HOT IN CLEVELAND Victoria (Wendie Malick) and the ladies head to Los Angeles for the Oscar nominations. Joy (Jane Leeves) develops a crush on her new boss (Tim Daly), who can’t keep his eyes off Melanie (Valerie Bertinelli). In “Jennifer Falls,” at 10:30, Jennifer (Jaime Pressly) and Dina (Missi Pyle) discover that they lost their virginity to the same man on the same day. KATHRYN SHATTUCK A version of this article appears in print on , on Page C 7 of the New York edition with the headline: What’s On Wednesday . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              