   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Movies Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Movie Listings for Oct. 23-29 Image Priscilla Lane and Robert Cummings in "Saboteur," playing in Film Society of Lincoln Center's "Hitchcock/Truffaut" series. See listing below. Credit Universal Pictures Oct. 22, 2015 Ratings and running times are in parentheses; foreign films have English subtitles. Full reviews of all current releases: nytimes.com/movie s. ‘All Things Must Pass: The Rise and Fall of Tower Records’ (No rating, 1:34) Colin Hanks’s agreeable documentary traces the ill-fated trajectory of an international music chain and its freewheeling corporate culture, which was part of its charm and perhaps of its undoing. (Webster) ★ ‘Amy’ (R, 2:08) Asif Kapadia’s shattering biographical portrait of the British singer and songwriter Amy Winehouse traces the arc of her short, messy life from smoky-voiced jazz singer to global pop sensation to her death in 2011, at 27, from alcohol poisoning. This material makes for uneasy viewing, as do some of her agonizing self-portraits, though there’s a great deal more to this documentary than sad spectacle. (Dargis) ‘The Assassin’ (No rating, 1:44) Ravishing to behold but stilted in its emotions and mannered in its techniques, this sword-and-vengeance mini-epic, directed by Hou Hsiao-Hsien, stars Shu Qi as a woman dispatched by the imperial authorities to kill a rebellious provincial potentate, who happens to be her cousin. (Scott) ‘Beasts of No Nation’ (No rating, 2:17) In an unnamed West African country, a young boy named Agu (the remarkable Abraham Attah) is caught up in a vicious civil war, fighting alongside other children and adolescences under the sway of a warlord known only as The Commandant (Idris Elba). Directed by Cary Joji Fukunaga and adapted from Uzodinma Iweala’s novel, the film is a decent, somewhat conventional combat movie and a fascinating, unnerving study of the psychology of violence. (Scott) ‘Black Mass’ (R, 2:02) The story of Whitey Bulger — a notorious Boston crime boss and longtime FBI informant — gets the standard gangster-movie treatment, with a few pungent performances (Johnny Depp as Bulger; Jesse Plemons as one of his henchmen) and a lot of dropped Rs. (Scott) ★ ‘Bridge of Spies’ (PG-13, 2:15) In this gravely moody, perfectly directed thriller about a real 1962 spy swap, Steven Spielberg returns you to the good old bad days of the Cold War and its fictions, with their bottomless political chasms and moral gray areas. Tom Hanks leads a terrific cast that includes Mark Rylance as a Soviet mole and Scott Shepherd as a C.I.A. operative. (Dargis) ‘Crimson Peak’ (R, 1:59) From Guillermo del Toro, modern cinema’s No. 1 genre geek, comes a lush and macabre gothic romance, with a few ghosts thrown in for extra scares. Mia Wasikowska plays Edith, an early-20th century heiress from Buffalo who marries a British aristocrat (Tom Hiddleston) and moves to the spooky mansion he shares with his sister (Jessica Chastain). The mood of sinister, brooding eroticism is broken by Mr. del Toro’s compulsive exuberance. He throws in too many special effects and technical tricks, when all he really needs is Ms. Chastain’s chin. (Scott) ‘Everest’ (PG-13, 2:01) A somber 3-D action spectacle, directed by Baltasar Kormakur, about an ill-fated Everest expedition in May, 1996. With Jake Gyllenhaal and Jason Clarke as rival guides leading climbers through the chaos and crowds on top of the world’s tallest mountain. (Scott) ★ ‘Experimenter’ (PG-13, 1:30) An aesthetically and intellectually playful portrait of the social psychologist Stanley Milgram (a delicate, sensitive Peter Sarsgaard), whose interest in questions of authority, conformity and conscience led him to create experiments in which subjects delivered punishing electric shocks on command. The director Michael Almereyda dusts off history and turns a biopic into a mind game. (Dargis) ‘Freeheld’ (PG-13, 1:36) Julianne Moore and Ellen Page can’t save this botched true story about two lesbians who must fight for their rights when one falls ill. (Dargis) ★ ‘Goodnight Mommy’ (R, 1:40) Unspooling with virtually no music and a seriously unsettling sound design, this richly photographed and carefully controlled creep-out (from the Austrian directors Veronika Franz and Severin Fiala) centers on the escalating cruelty of twin boys who come to believe that their mother is an impostor. (Catsoulis) ‘Goosebumps’ (PG, 1:43) R.L. Stine’s best-selling series spawns a jam-packed CGI-heavy adaptation that’s more like a toy chest than a movie. Jack Black plays the author, imagined here as a curmudgeon whose books actually harbor spooky characters that are released into the real world by a couple of teenagers. Colorful squeal-inducing havoc follows, but most real feeling is roped off in stilted scenes. (Rapold) ★ ‘Grandma’ (R, 1:20) A small marvel. Lily Tomlin plays a cantankerous feminist poet whose pregnant granddaughter (Julia Garner) wants an abortion. Paul Weitz wrote and directed this intimate, heartfelt and extremely funny comedy. With Marcia Gay Harden, Sam Elliott and Judy Greer. (Scott) ‘He Named Me Malala’ (PG-13, 1:27) Malala Yousafzai, the Pakistani teenager who was shot by the Taliban in 2012 but has continued to campaign for education for girls, is a familiar face now in the West, especially since winning the Nobel Peace Prize. This documentary about her by Davis Guggenheim, which feels as if it is made for a school-age audience, is content to propagate her message, only intermittently finding the unguarded moments beneath the media image. (Genzlinger) ★ ‘Heart of a Dog’ (No rating, 1:15) This dreamy, drifty and altogether lovely autobiographical movie from the artist and musician Laurie Anderson is about telling and remembering and forgetting, and how we put together the fragments that make up our lives – their flotsam and jetsam, highs and lows, meaningful and slight details, shrieking and weeping headline news. (Dargis) ‘Hotel Transylvania 2’ (PG, 1:29) Adam Sandler returns as the voice of Dracula, whose daughter and her human husband (voiced by Selena Gomez and Andy Samberg) have produced a son. While Drac yearns for him to show a vampirish side, the in-laws do not. Conflicts over parenting styles and bits about out-of-touch oldsters ensue. As it turns out, gags about texting-challenged seniors are no less tedious when applied to the undead. Still, the whole thing is amiable and colorful. It may not kill you to take your kids. (Glenn Kenny) ‘The Intern’ (PG-13, 2:01) In Nancy Meyer’s latest lifestyle fantasy, Robert De Niro plays a gentler, kinder father figure who comes equipped with a laundered handkerchief and the wisdom of the elders for his new boss (Anne Hathaway), an entrepreneur with issues. (Dargis) ★ ‘Jane B. par Agnès V.’ (No rating, 1:37 in French and English) From the inspired New Wave director Agnès Varda comes a distinctive, delightful and sometimes even surreal portrait of the actress, singer, model and muse Jane Birkin. It’s a film of admiration and sometimes adoration. (Kenny) ★ ‘The Martian’ (PG-13, 2:21) Matt Damon stars in Ridley Scott’s space western and blissed-out cosmic high about an American astronaut who, like a latter-day Robinson Crusoe, learns to survive on his own island of despair. Funny, loose and optimistic. (Dargis) ‘Maze Runner: The Scorch Trials’ (PG-13, 2:11) The second in a series about a racially diverse but otherwise interchangeable set of teenagers adds nothing new to the unkillable dystopian genre, but it’s at least less ponderous than its predecessor. The many chases and ludicrous narrow escapes offer respectable doses of adrenaline. (John Williams) ‘Meadowland’ (R, 1:45) Olivia Wilde and Luke Wilson do compelling work in this drama about a couple whose young son disappears on a family trip. The movie isn’t about the search for him so much as it is about the way the loss affects his mother and father, each in different ways. (Genzlinger) ‘Meet the Patels’ (PG, 1:28) This tidy, easygoing documentary — about the efforts of Indian-born parents to marry off their prosperous son (the actor Ravi Patel) through assorted matchmaking means — is a fascinating, good-humored and sometimes dramatic examination of family dynamics. Though Mr. Patel is on camera most often (shot by his wry, understated foil, sister and co-director, Geeta), it’s his parents and the barely seen Geeta who prove most compelling. (Webster) ★ ‘Meru’ (R, 1:30) An ultrasmooth blend of conventional documentary techniques and uncommon ambition, Jimmy Chin and Elizabeth Chai Vasarhelyi’s blindingly beautiful account of two terrifying climbing expeditions on Mount Meru in India pokes at the psychology of extremity and illuminates personalities for whom calculating risk is a way of life. (Catsoulis) ★ ‘Mistress America’ (R, 1:24) Noah Baumbach’s movie advertises itself as a screwball comedy, but it is not really the zany, lighter-than-air divertissement that the term usually conjures. It would be more accurate to describe the smart, fast-paced film (with a sensational lead performance by Greta Gerwig) as a movie that revises and subverts this most buoyant of genres with a steady undertow of anxiety, dread and anger. (Holden) ★ ’99 Homes’ (R, 1:52) In this powerful parable of predatory capitalism, directed by Ramin Bahrani (“Chop Shop”), Michael Shannon is demonically charismatic as Rick Carver, a ruthless Florida real estate broker whose specialty is evictions and foreclosures. Andrew Garfield plays Dennis Nash, a construction worker who starts out as one of Rick’s victims and winds up his right-hand man. The movie is as fast-moving and tense as any thriller; it’s a crime story with a man’s soul at stake. (Scott) ‘Pan’ (PG, 1:51) Ostensibly an origin story about Peter Pan, this woeful would-be blockbuster, directed by the usually competent Joe Wright, is a murky, lumpy stew of pop-culture borrowings, from Harry Potter to “Avatar.” (Scott) ★ ‘Pawn Sacrifice’ (PG-13, 1:56) The director Edward Zwick serves up an absorbing dramatization of the 1972 chess match between Bobby Fischer and Boris Spassky, with Tobey Maguire playing the eccentric Fischer, who struggled with demons real and imagined as the world watched the Cold War proxy showdown. The film is only partly about Fischer; it’s also about our dismaying tendency to place too much importance on chess matches, sporting events and so on, regardless of the human cost. (Genzlinger) ‘The Perfect Guy’ (PG-13, 1:40) Michael Ealy is the creep and Sanaa Lathan is the woman who can’t get rid of him in this generic stalker movie. Mr. Ealy developed a convincing vacant stare when he played a humanoid police officer on television in “Almost Human,” and he employs it to chilling effect here, but the story goes exactly where you expect. (Genzlinger) ‘Room’ (R, 1:58) Brie Larson and an exceptional child actor, Jacob Tremblay, play mother and son in the adaptation of Emma Donoghue’s novel. Written by Ms. Donoghue and directed by Lenny Abrahamson, the movie flickers with grace and imagination during its initial half but devolves into a dreary, platitudinous therapy movie in its second. (Dargis) ‘Sicario’ (R, 2:01) Emily Blunt plays an FBI agent caught up in nefarious doings on the United States-Mexico border in this violent fable, directed by Denis Villeneuve. Brutal and suspenseful, the film almost lives up to its potential to transcend the usual genre machinery and reveal some of the deep moral ambiguities of the drug war. (Scott) ★ ‘Steve Jobs’ (R, 2:02) This three-panel portrait of the Apple co-founder, written by Aaron Sorkin and directed by Danny Boyle, portrays Jobs (Michael Fassbender) as a complicated, ambitious man caught in a tangle of messy personal and business relationships. Isolating Jobs at three crucial moments in his career, the film plays like a fast, busy backstage comedy and ends up being a richly intelligent exploration of our ambivalence about technology, genius and consumer capitalism. (Scott) ‘Straight Outta Compton’ (R, 2:22) F. Gary Gray’s exultant rap-to-riches story tracks the group N.W.A., who — with beats, smarts, corrosive poetry and powerful rhetoric — helped introduce gangster rap to an alternately freaked-out and receptive world. It’s a story of ultimate outsiders turned ultimate insiders, which makes it as blissfully American as apple pie, low riders and gangster rap itself. (Dargis) ‘Tab Hunter Confidential’ (No rating, 1:30) This documentary portrait of the closeted 1950s screen heartthrob is as mild-mannered and blandly likable as its subject. (Holden) ★ ‘Taxi’ (No rating, 1:22) Shot almost entirely with a dashboard-mounted video camera, Jafar Panahi’s latest film — his third since the Iranian government banned him from practicing his craft in 2010 — is a wry meditation on the slippery boundary between movies and reality and a pointed work of social criticism. What seems like a random series of encounters turns out to be an elegantly shaped and poignant parable of modern urban life. (Scott) ★ ‘Trainwreck’ (R, 2:04) Here, the comic Amy Schumer plays a more vanilla version of one of her comically flawed women, who aren’t as remotely together as they think. The movie was directed by Judd Apatow from Ms. Schumer’s script, and is often extremely funny, even if it never approaches the radicalness of her best work. (Dargis) ★ ‘Truth’ (R, 2:01) The title of “Truth,” a gripping, beautifully executed journalistic thriller about the events that ended Dan Rather’s career as a CBS anchorman, should probably be appended with a question mark. More than most docudramas about fairly recent events, it is so well-written and acted that it conveys an eerie illusion of veracity. (Holden) ★ ‘Victoria’ (No rating, 2:18) “Victoria” is a sensational cinematic stunt. From its blinding strobe-lit opening, driven by pounding electronica, this German heist thriller directed by Sebastian Schipper conveys the queasy excitement of being dropped onto a roller coaster midride. (Holden) ‘The Visit’ (PG-13, 1:34) A “Hansel and Gretel” redo for Generation Selfie, M. Night Shyamalan’s latest tracks a brother and sister into the woods, except this time they’re holding camcorders. Squeaking doors, creaking floors and some nice boos ensue. (Dargis) ★ ‘The Walk’ (PG, 2:03) Think of the sometimes irritating first hour as a vaudevillian warm-up act, with the song-and-dance man Joseph Gordon-Levitt doing his best to entertain you with circus tricks and a French accent. He’s playing Philippe Petit, whose high-wire walk between the towers of the World Trade Center in 1974 is the subject of Robert Zemeckis’s uneven but ultimately enthralling new film. Once Petit and his co-conspirators arrive in New York, the movie becomes a wondrous and charming daredevil act of its own, as Mr. Zemeckis uses his mastery of digital techniques to turn a fondly remembered stunt into a thrilling and touching caper. (Scott) Film Series Behind the Mask: ‘Bamboozled’ in Focus (Wednesday through Nov. 3) Fifteen years have done nothing to mitigate the “Did I just see what I think I just saw?” jolt of Spike Lee’s “Bamboozled.” Featuring Savion Glover as the star of a television show that was created in protest and became a surprise hit, it was a broadside against racial stereotypes in entertainment. Mr. Lee will participate in a Q. and A. after Wednesday’s 7:30 p.m. screening with the critic Ashley Clark, who has described “Bamboozled” as “equal parts crystal ball and cannonball.” Mr. Clark has also selected a group of complementary films, from such obvious predecessors as “Network” and “A Face in the Crowd” to a pair of superb Marlon Riggs documentaries about the enduring strength of these stereotypes. BAM Rose Cinemas, 30 Lafayette Avenue, at Ashland Place, Fort Greene, Brooklyn, 718-636-4100, bam.org. (Eric Grode) Consequences (Fridays through Dec. 18) Truth be told, this overarching theme for the Rubin Museum of Art’s latest Cabaret Cinema series is fairly accommodating. With the occasional exception of the Coen brothers at their most fatalistic, what other filmmaker would claim that their on-screen actions have no reactions? Still, the museum (which has an accompanying series of public talks about karma) has assembled some fairly instructive examples, ranging from the obvious (“The Blue Angel,” “Le Jetée”) to the less so (“Night of the Living Dead”). This week’s offering is “Alphaville” (1965), starring Eddie Constantine, Anna Karina and Akim Tamiroff. At 9:30 p.m., 150 West 17th Street, Chelsea, 212-620-5000, rubinmuseum.org. (Grode) Film 101: Canon Fodder (through Dec. 27) This enterprising brunch series would warrant mention just for the shameless subtitle, but the films are pretty nifty, too. IFC Center continues its efforts to expose high school students to some of the greats – complete with free admission and free popcorn at some showings – with John Ford’s iconic Western “The Searchers,” which has left its mark on everything from “Lawrence of Arabia” to “Breaking Bad.” Subsequent titles include “Battleship Potemkin,” “Citizen Kane,” “2001: A Space Odyssey” and (brace yourself, youngsters) “Taxi Driver.” Grade schoolteachers can also pick up a free annual membership to the theater. 323 Avenue of the Americas, at Third Street, Greenwich Village; 212-924-7771, ifccenter.com. (Grode) ‘Frederick Wiseman’s New York’ (Saturday, and through Nov. 7) Not every city is enamored of Mr. Wiseman and his small-bore investigations into the workings and nuances of modern society: The governor of Massachusetts tried to ban the release of “Titicut Follies” back in 1967, and Mr. Wiseman opted not to screen “High School” in Philadelphia, where he filmed it, for fear of being sued. But New York City has welcomed him and his discerning eye repeatedly over the last 45 years. Museum of the Moving Image will screen seven of the results, with subjects ranging from Metropolitan Hospital (“Hospital”) to Central Park (“Central Park” on Sunday). Mr. Wiseman will appear on Oct. 28 to show clips from his ninth New York film, “In Jackson Heights,” which opens in theaters on Nov. 4. 35th Avenue at 37th Street, Astoria, Queens, 718-784-0077, movingimage.us. (Grode) ‘Hitchcock/Truffaut’ (Tuesday and Wednesday) In 1962 Alfred Hitchcock, fresh off making his 40th film, sat down for a series of interviews with François Truffaut (who at that point had made three pictures). The resulting book helped upend the entire high-low cultural caste system that had put the Truffauts of the world on one level and the Hitchcocks of the world on another. Along with a sneak preview of Kent Jones’s affectionate new documentary on this collaboration (Tuesday at 7 p.m.), Film Society of Lincoln Center is showing an intriguing quartet of Hitchcock: one of his earlier films — the 1929 silent romance “The Manxman” (Wednesday at 4 p.m.); one of his last ones — “Frenzy,” his only R-rated title (Wednesday at 8:45 p.m.); the World War II hit “Saboteur” (Wednesday at 6:30 p.m.) and 1953’s “I Confess” (Tuesday at 9:30 p.m.), which played a big role in getting Truffaut and his Cahiers du Cinéma cohort firmly in Hitchcock’s corner. Walter Reade Theater, Lincoln Center, 165 West 65th Street, 212-875-5601, filmlinc.com. (Grode) ‘Horror Hotel’ and ‘A Nightmare on Elm Street’ (Saturday) Even though Halloween is more than a week away, several theaters are getting spooky, from “Ghostbusters” at Film Forum, to “They Live!” at IFC Center, to “Frankenhooker” at Nitehawk Cinema. Still, one double feature stands out: The Landmark Loew’s Jersey Theater in Jersey City, N.J., pays tribute to two horror legends who died in the last year — the actor Christopher Lee and the director Wes Craven. Mr. Lee’s 1963 witches-in-Massachusetts film “Horror Hotel” begins at 6:30 p.m., followed at 8:20 p.m. by “A Nightmare on Elm Street,” which transformed Mr. Craven from upsettingly deviant (“The Last House on the Left”) to giddily deviant. 54 Journal Square, 201-798-6055, loewsjersey.org. (Grode) Margaret Mead Film Festival (Thursday through Oct. 25) Cultures don’t cross much more bizarrely than in Huizou, China, the home of a painstaking scale-model replica of the Austrian village of Hallstatt. This odd entity is the subject of “Double Happiness” (next Friday), one of more than 40 documentaries to be featured in this globe-trotting festival. Among the other subjects are South India’s first female taxi driver (“Driving With Selvi,” Sunday), a devotee of joy riding in Saudi Arabia’s capital (“Hajwalah,” Saturday) and a bastion of Ukrainian women who have met regularly in the East Village to make dumplings for almost 50 years (“The Ladies,” Friday). American Museum of Natural History, Central Park West at 79th Street, 212-769-5200, amnh.org/mead. (Grode) Maurice Pialat (through Nov. 1) The French New Wave’s semi-approving older brother? The pungent realist who dared to adapt a novel by the Robert Bresson collaborator Georges Bernanos, earning himself catcalls at Cannes in the process? The Gallic John Cassavetes? Pialat was all of these things, sort of, and he didn’t let a late start (he was 44 when he directed his first film) stop him from mining his own deeply autobiographical seam of the human experience. This retrospective features all 10 of Pialat’s features – beginning on Friday with 1968’s “Naked Childhood,” which doubles down on the unsparing reminiscences of “The 400 Blows” – along with several shorts he shot in Turkey and the acclaimed 1971 mini-series “La Maison des Bois.” Museum of the Moving Image, 35th Avenue at 37th Street, Astoria, Queens, 718-784-0077, movingimage.us. (Grode) ‘Rocco and His Brothers’ (through Thursday) It’s impossible to imagine Italian Neo-Realists like Roberto Rossellini finding common cause with the freewheeling likes of Michelangelo Antonioni and Federico Fellini a generation later. But Luchino Visconti made the leap with this 1960 synthesis of everyone from Dostoyevsky to Thomas Mann to Arthur Miller. Giuseppe Rotunno’s cinematography turns practically every frame into a postcard of Milan in all its corrupting allure, but even with the film’s new restoration, there’s nothing arch or manicured about the displaced, roiling Parondi clan at its center. Darting up and down (but mostly down) the city’s social strata, Visconti created a textured, operatic masterpiece with “Rocco,” his personal favorite film and one whose volatile family dynamics are still evident in movies more than 50 years later. Film Forum, 209 West Houston Street, west of Avenue of the Americas, South Village, 212-727-8110, filmforum.org. (Grode) Stranger Than Fiction (Tuesdays, through Nov. 24) This series has served for the last decade as a vital New York outpost for award-winning documentaries from such nonfiction heavyweights as D.A. Pennebaker and Albert Maysles. This week’s offering is “An Omar Broadway Film.” At 8 p.m., 323 Avenue of the Americas, at Third Street, Greenwich Village; 212-924-7771, ifccenter.com. (Grode) ‘Theater & Cinema’ (Tuesdays, through Oct. 27) When a film is referred to as “stagebound,” it’s usually not a compliment. The implication is a series of lengthy, moth-eaten interior scenes interspersed with equally forced attempts to “open up” the action. But this French Institute Alliance Française CinéSalon series shifts the focus to the (mostly male) directors and (mostly female) performers who create theater pieces. It began on Sept. 22 with Roman Polanski’s racy “Venus in Fur” and ends this week with Francois Truffaut’s “The Last Metro.” At 4 and 7:30 p.m., Florence Gould Hall, 55 East 59th Street, Manhattan, 800-982-2787, fiaf.org. (Grode) A version of this article appears in print on , on Page C 16 of the New York edition with the headline: The Listings: Movies . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              