   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index New York Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Robin Hood, Favorite Charity on Wall Street, Gets New Leader Image Wes Moore, an author, combat veteran and entrepreneur, will become the chief executive of Robin Hood, which distributed $130 million last year. Credit Hilary Swift for The New York Times By  Elizabeth A. Harris April 25, 2017 The Robin Hood foundation, a poverty-fighting nonprofit organization that finances more than 200 programs across New York City, was set to announce on Tuesday that Wes Moore, an author, combat veteran and entrepreneur, will become its chief executive. Robin Hood is a significant philanthropic force in the city. Last year, it distributed $130 million to organizations there, including charter schools, health care providers and early childhood programs. In its 29 years, it has raised $2.5 billion from individuals and other foundations, and it is a favorite charity on Wall Street and among hedge funds. Mr. Moore was raised largely in the Bronx, near Gun Hill Road, where he, his mother and his two sisters lived with his grandparents. The family moved there from Maryland a year or two after his father died, when he was 3. Mr. Moore said living in the Bronx affected how he thought about poverty and philanthropy. “Disparity is real,” he said. “We have communities that have been neglected, and I have lived in one of them. That was something very deeply ingrained in me from a very young age.” Mr. Moore, 38, graduated from Johns Hopkins University in 2001 and then received a master’s degree in international relations from Oxford University, as a Rhodes Scholar, in 2004. After graduating, he was a paratrooper with the 82nd Airborne Division and a captain in the United States Army and did a combat tour in Afghanistan. Mr. Moore founded BridgeEdU, an organization that helps students get to college and stay enrolled, in 2014 and is its chief executive. He has also written four books, including “The Other Wes Moore,” published in 2010, about how the lives of two young men who shared a name and came from similar poor neighborhoods diverged. “Who I fight for stays consistent,” Mr. Moore said. “The people I fight for, and those that Robin Hood will continue to fight for, are those who have been frequently left behind. It’s the underserved, the underresourced. It’s the people we are having conversations about, and not having conversations with.” Mr. Moore succeeds David Saltzman, who stepped down at the end of last year after 27 years running the organization. Reynold Levy , former president of Lincoln Center, became president of Robin Hood in 2015 on a transitional basis, the foundation said. Mr. Saltzman is now on the foundation’s board, and several big names have recently joined him there. Kaya Henderson , former chancellor of the Washington, D.C., public school system, was appointed to the board in March, along with John B. King Jr. , who was secretary of education under President Barack Obama. “Wes is an outstanding fit to lead Robin Hood,” Mr. King said in a statement, “because of his fierce and unwavering dedication to service as evidenced by his time in the military, his advocacy for youth and veterans, his experience as a social entrepreneur and his work to ensure education is a pathway to opportunity for young people growing up in poverty.” Mr. Moore will begin his new post full time this summer. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page A 17 of the New York edition with the headline: Antipoverty  Foundation Installing New Leader . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Related Coverage Robin Hood Event Adjusts to Tough Times May 12, 2009 Image Opinion Nicholas Kristof Two Men and Two Paths June 12, 2010 Image Reynold Levy Takes His Fund-Raising Skills to the Robin Hood Foundation Sept. 30, 2015 Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              