   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index NYT Now Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Your Thursday Evening Briefing By  Kathryn Varn and Sandra Stevenson July 23, 2015 Good evening. Here’s the latest. Image Credit Vadim Ghirda/Associated Press 1. Turkey agreed to let the United States use an air base near Syria to carry out strikes against the Islamic State . News of the decision arrived alongside reports of an attack on Turkish forces at the border, and after a suicide bombing that killed 27. Both incidents were apparently traced to ISIS. Image Credit Pool photo by Carolyn Kaster 2. In Iraq , an unexpected visit by Defense Secretary Ashton B. Carter coincided with the deployment of 3,000 American-trained Iraqi troops to retake Ramadi from the Islamic State. The pivotal western city was seized in May. Image Credit Pat Sullivan/Associated Press 3. An autopsy of Sandra Bland  showed injuries consistent with suicide and no evidence that someone else killed her in her Texas jail cell. The Waller County sheriff’s office has said Ms. Bland hanged herself with a trash bag, but her family insists she was in good mental health. Image Credit LM Otero/Associated Press 4. Donald Trump emphasized the “danger” to himself as he headed to the U.S.-Mexico border near Laredo, Tex. Mr. Trump’s inflammatory comments last month about immigrants from Mexico have served both as a focus for his critics and a rallying point for his fans . Image Credit Justin Sullivan/Getty Images 5. “Holy cow, what a quarter.” So said an investor who follows Amazon, which reported much better than expected earnings , with a profit of 19 cents per share. The company’s stock shot up in after-hours trading. Image Credit Peter Nicholls/Reuters 6. Pearson’s shares are up 1.17 percent after Nikkei, a Japanese media group, agreed to buy The Financial Times newspaper for $1.3 billion. The Dow fell 119 points, or 0.67 percent, and the S.&P. 500 was down 12 points, or 0.57 percent. Image Credit Andrew Harnik/Associated Press 7. Secretary of State John Kerry  urged senators to accept provisions of the recent deal with Iran that would limit its nuclear production. Republican senators who don’t believe the agreement goes far enough accused Mr. Kerry of having been “fleeced” and “bamboozled.” Image Credit Zach Gibson/The New York Times 8. President Obama made a surprise appearance at an event for underprivileged students before heading to Kenya , his father’s homeland. He avoided Africa for much of his time in the White House because of its ties to speculation about his citizenship. Image Credit Chris Hondros/Getty Images 9. For the least sick end-stage cancer patients , last-ditch chemotherapy made things worse , said a study published today. Newer drugs are more targeted and have fewer side effects, an oncologist noted. Image Credit NASA 10. Scientists are a step closer to locating Earth 2.0 . Astronomers associated with Kepler, NASA’s planet-hunting spacecraft, say they spotted what may be the most Earth-like body yet. It circles a star in a 385-day orbit, has lukewarm temperatures and may have a rocky surface. Video Drone footage shows an apparent crop circle formation that purportedly appeared in a field in southern Russia on Tuesday. Published On July 23, 2015 Credit Image by Associated Press 11.  There was a U.F.O. involved in this video, but it’s a drone, which shot the footage of crop circles in a Russian field. Enthusiasts of the paranormal say the same pattern appeared there 10 years ago today. Michael Owen contributed reporting. Video produced by Quyn Do. Your Evening Briefing is posted at 6 p.m. Eastern. And don’t miss Your Weekend Briefing, posted at 6 a.m. Sundays. Want to look back? Here’s Wednesday’s Evening Briefing . What did you like? What do you want to see here? Let us know at briefing@nytimes.com . Related Coverage Your Wednesday Evening Briefing July 22, 2015 Image Your Tuesday Evening Briefing July 21, 2015 Image Your Monday Evening Briefing July 20, 2015 Image Show All Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              