   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Opinion Supported by Editorial Observer Senator Kaine and Gov. Pence: Face-Off in Farmville! By  Elizabeth Williamson Oct. 4, 2016 Image A worker polishes a star on the vice presidential debate set. Credit Mark Wilson/Getty Images North America It’s safe to say Tuesday’s vice-presidential debate won’t rival the Hillary Clinton-Donald Trump rumble for great television moments. It features two middle-aged, white, Midwest-raised politicians who call themselves “boring” (Tim Kaine) and “B-list” (Mike Pence). And running mates play an even smaller role than usual in 2016, given the outsized personalities at the top of the tickets. But if these two men are willing to seriously engage the issues (and the rest of us are willing to stay awake), they could provide useful insights into their sharply contrasting plans for the future. Such an exchange would be particularly illuminating on the Republican side. Even to many in his own party, Mr. Pence, a former congressman and the sitting Indiana governor, struck a Faustian bargain by joining the Trump ticket. But he has tried to articulate a different set of principles, in contrast to dead-enders like Rudolph Giuliani, Newt Gingrich and Chris Christie. If Mr. Trump loses, Mr. Pence will likely be part of a rump of Republican leaders left to pick up the pieces and focus the party in a more positive direction. Left largely on his own while the Trump inner circle fights fires (and each other), Mr. Pence has been trying to reassure conservatives and evangelicals that he’ll represent them. A social conservative, his anti-abortion, anti-gay stances are deeply at odds with many Americans’ views. At the same time, he has rejected Mr. Trump’s attacks on the family of an American Muslim soldier killed in Iraq, and distanced himself from Mr. Trump’s “birther” campaign. Though he says he’s against Obamacare, as governor he backed the Medicaid expansion that was central to it. He has waffled on the legal fate of 11 million undocumented immigrants, but he has not come out in favor of deporting them. He can legitimately claim firsthand experience and some successes confronting the hollowing-out of the American manufacturing economy. Mr. Pence may in fact be in a better position than Mr. Trump to reinforce the ticket’s appeal to working-class voters, given Mr. Trump’s recent preoccupation with personal attacks and bizarre tweets. Mr. Kaine, the junior senator from Virginia and its former governor, will field the first question of the debate from Elaine Quijano of CBS News, the moderator. At some point he’ll surely attack Mr. Trump’s income tax filings. But it might be more interesting, given his fluent Spanish and service as a missionary in Honduras, to hear a clearer articulation of the Clinton campaign’s vague promise of “comprehensive immigration reform.” What would that legislation contain, and how could it succeed? Mr. Kaine could also spell out more fully why Mrs. Clinton reversed her position on the Trans-Pacific Partnership trade agreement. The campaign says it had to do with specific weaknesses in the agreement, but her turnabout still mystifies many voters. The debate is set in Mr. Kaine’s home state, Virginia, known for weak laws on influence peddling. What are Mr. Kaine’s ideas for fulfilling a pledge to carry out tougher campaign finance laws? This is the only time the vice-presidential nominees will debate before the election. Compared with the flaming barbecue that was last week’s presidential debate, this one seems like boiled cauliflower. But a helping of policy substance might be good for everybody.  Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter (@NYTopinion) , and sign up for the Opinion Today newsletter . A version of this article appears in print on , on Page A 22 of the New York edition with the headline: Gov. Pence and Senator Kaine Face Off . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              