   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Weddings Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Sydnie Henkin, Alexander Fogelson Image Credit Nancy Borowick March 27, 2016 Sydnie Laura Henkin, a daughter of Susan L. Henkin and Edward R. Henkin of Amagansett, N.Y., was married March 26 to Alexander Isaac Fogelson, the son of Linda B. Fogelson and Stephen L. Fogelson of New York. Rabbi Judith Kempler officiated at Il Mercato, an event space in New Orleans. The couple met at Tulane University, from which they graduated, and where Mr. Fogelson also received a master’s degree in finance. Mrs. Fogelson, 25, is the head prekindergarten teacher at the Kaplan Nursery School of the Sutton Place Synagogue in New York. She received a dual master’s degree in special and general early-childhood education from the Bank Street College of Education. Her father is the president of Edge Hill Homes, a residential developer in the Hamptons, Miami and Palm Beach. Her mother is a trustee of Gulliver Schools, a Miami-based group of private coeducational day schools. Mr. Fogelson, 26, is a co-founder and the managing partner of Taste Beauty, a company in New York that develops and sells beauty products. Until 2007, his mother was an owner of Penny Auntie 5 & 10, a candy and toy store that was in Chappaqua, N.Y. His father, who is also retired, was the founder and chief executive of Lotta Luv, a New York cosmetics company, now known as GBG Beauty and part of Li & Fung, the Hong Kong trading company. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page ST 15 of the New York edition with the headline: Sydnie Henkin,  Alexander Fogelson . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              