   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Weddings Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Morgan Bisignano, Sam Lituchy Image Credit Derrick Huynh Sept. 11, 2016 Morgan Julia Bisignano, a daughter of Nancy A. Bisignano of Green Brook, N.J., and Frank J. Bisignano of Watchung, N.J., was married Sept. 10 to Sam Albert Lituchy, a son of Barbara H. Lituchy and Richard B. Lituchy of Melville, N.Y. Rabbi Arthur L. Schwartz officiated on Ellis Island. Msgr. Jamie J. Gigantiello performed a Roman Catholic blessing before the ceremony. The couple met at Syracuse University, from which both graduated, he cum laude. Mrs. Lituchy, 27, is an associate manager for production and product development in the corporate offices of Ann Taylor in New York. Her father is the chairman and chief executive, in the New York office, of First Data Corporation, an Atlanta company that manages debit- and credit-card transactions and is part of KKR & Company, the investment firm. He is also a director of the National September 11 Memorial and Museum and a trustee of the Battery Park Conservancy. Mr. Lituchy, also 27, is a director for business development of First Data, in its New York office. His mother is a freelance jewelry designer in Melville. His father, an architect, is the founder of MSR Builders, a real estate development and remodeling firm in Melville. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page ST 25 of the New York edition with the headline: Morgan Bisignano,  Sam Lituchy . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              