   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Europe Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Opposition Leader Tests Public Support for Bid to Topple Putin Image Aleksei A. Navalny, the Russian opposition politician, preparing for his weekly live broadcast on YouTube. Credit James Hill for The New York Times By  Neil MacFarquhar June 9, 2017 MOSCOW — It would be three days before the fierce Kremlin critic Aleksei A. Navalny would bring his against-all-odds presidential campaign to the provincial city of Vladimir, but officials at the local university were taking no chances. About 100 students were ordered into the main auditorium to watch two short films attacking the opposition leader as both a United States State Department stooge and a would-be Nazi-saluting Hitler . When several students accused the lecturer of fear-mongering and suggested screening Mr. Navalny’s latest, wildly popular anticorruption video to broaden the discussion, she scolded them, saying, “You have no respect!” “It was nonsense, a smear against Navalny,” one sophomore who attended the lecture said in an interview, not wanting to use his name, given the implicit threats. “The government talks all the time about what it is doing, but it really does not function. Its only real activity seems to be fighting the opposition.” The moonscape of Russian opposition politics showed unexpected signs of life in late March, when an anticorruption protest called by Mr. Navalny elicited a robust national response. In more than 80 cities across Russia, tens of thousands of demonstrators marched, the largest such political protest in five years. Mr. Navalny has called for an even bigger protest on Monday, describing it as a test of the opposition’s breadth and, by extension, of public support for his attempt to challenge President Vladimir V. Putin in the March 2018 presidential election. Activists in about 210 cities have requested permits to march. “It’s a wave!” Mr. Navalny exclaimed on his live talk show on YouTube on June 1. Mr. Navalny and the Kremlin have been sparring for years, since he emerged as an opposition figure in large street protests in 2011, 2012 and 2013 that unnerved Mr. Putin. Lately, he has taken to repeatedly embarrassing senior officials, exposing their lavish mansions and other perquisites that seem beyond the reach of public servants earning a modest government salary. Over the years, Mr. Navalny has been confronted with numerous legal entanglements, all of which he has dismissed as politically motivated. He has been convicted of embezzlement in a timber case, accused of defrauding a French perfume company and stealing a nearly worthless piece of street art, and even drawn into a case involving the death of an elk. The upshot is that he is barred from running against Mr. Putin in next year’s election. Barred as well from state television, Mr. Navalny has turned to YouTube to communicate with his followers, particularly young people who find state television wearisome at best. He now hosts a weekly talk show, “ Navalny Live ,” that airs every Thursday night at precisely 20:18. (Get it? He is running for president in 2018.) “Getting out to the regions took place thanks to YouTube,” he said in a recent interview on the set of the show. More than 22 million people have watched the anticorruption video , focused on Prime Minister Dmitri A. Medvedev, and Mr. Navalny’s various channels have attracted some 1.5 million subscribers. Image Mr. Navalny meeting with volunteers in Ivanovo, Russia. It is not clear if he will be able to mount a 2018 campaign against President Vladimir V. Putin. Credit James Hill for The New York Times “It is very important to bring politics back to small cities. Before, any political discussion, any movement was only in Moscow and, maybe in the best circumstances, St. Petersburg,” he said. Mr. Navalny is hoping that pays off on Monday, which is Russia Day, a national holiday. He has exhorted protesters to show up carrying only Russian flags, on the assumption that the sight of helmeted riot police carting off demonstrators embracing the national flag will serve as a kind of visual taunt against Kremlin accusations that the opposition is a small pack of Western lackeys. His latest confrontation with the Kremlin began on March 2, when the charismatic, 41-year-old opposition leader released the slick video shot by drones depicting the prime minister’s vast, luxury real estate holdings, paid for by some of Russia’s richest tycoons. By cleverly targeting Mr. Medvedev rather than Mr. Putin, who remains a highly popular totem of Russian might, and by making pocketbook issues the focus of the protests, Mr. Navalny struck a nerve, particularly among the young. The Kremlin has been scrambling to respond, with a couple of harsh prison sentences for two protesters, student lectures like the one in Vladimir and various videos denigrating him. Alisher B. Usmanov, a billionaire in the Kremlin’s orbit, attracted the most attention with two YouTube videos calling Mr. Navalny a failure. (Each ended with the line “I spit on you.”) Various political observers think such Kremlin efforts have had a boomerang effect, making Mr. Navalny more appealing. It’s an opinion shared by Mr. Navalny himself. Mr. Navalny began his YouTube talk show about three months ago after seeing the millions of viewers attracted to videos produced by the Anti-Corruption Committee, his nongovernmental organization, which delights in exposing the riches amassed by senior government officials with modest salaries. Sitting at a plain white Ikea table recently before the show on June 1, he tried to leaven what he unexpectedly called his stage fright with jokes. “Everything in Russia is held together with tape,” he mocked as technicians attempted to attach his microphone to his tie with green electrician’s tape. Then he spent an hour discussing various social and political issues, fed by questions off Twitter from what his producer said were 42,000 viewers. A trained corporate lawyer, he talked freely with only occasional glances at notes. After the March protest, he went to jail for 15 days and agents from the Federal Security Service, known as the F.S.B., confiscated all the computers and broadcast equipment from his main Moscow office. Hecklers dog his campaign appearances. Mr. Navalny has been splashed in the face at least twice recently with green dye, and the second attack caused a chemical burn that blurred the vision in his right eye. The government lifted his travel ban so he could go to Spain for an operation that was expected to restore most of it. Image Mr. Navalny with volunteers in Vladimir, a city about 115 miles northeast of Moscow. Credit James Hill for The New York Times Internet users identified one attacker from closed-circuit television footage as a notorious nationalist whom the police used as a witness in another protest case, but the man has yet to be detained. Aside from YouTube, Mr. Navalny has been spreading his word locally by opening presidential campaign offices in scores of small cities, where he gets big points just for showing up. Few other politicians bother. Although technically barred from vying for the presidency in 2018 because of his politically motivated convictions, he is hoping that a groundswell of support will force the Kremlin to let him run. Some political observers consider that unlikely, however, since an official presidential campaign would give him a national platform to attack Mr. Putin directly. Yet the Kremlin needs a credible challenger to make the election seem real. In his basic stump speech, Mr. Navalny hammers away at how little ordinary Russians benefit from the vast oil and gas revenues that flow to the Kremlin and its cronies. “Money should be distributed evenly across the country; all this money swallowed around the country is collected in Moscow, where it is stolen,” he told an enthusiastic audience of mostly young people in April in Vladimir, a small city of about 350,000 roughly 115 miles northeast of the capital. “Here we live among ruins and talk about stability.” He accuses the Putin administration of making a cult out of stability to camouflage low salaries, poor housing and dismal public health services. “People think that it is impossible to have a normal, happy life in Russia,” he said. “We can live better, have more; we can dream.” He also habitually criticizes open immigration from the predominantly Muslim Central Asian nations that were once part of the Soviet Union, raising fears among liberal supporters that he has not really changed his previously staunchly nationalist beliefs. At the opening of campaign offices in both Vladimir and Ivanovo, some supporters suggested that while they doubted Mr. Navalny could win in 2018 given Mr. Putin’s popularity, he could set the stage now for 2024. The candidate bristles, saying that idea reminds him of Zimbabwe, which has had the same leader for more than 35 years. “So with these thoughts about 2018 or 2024 or 2044, I am imagining Putin with a bionic body who has been in power for 50 years and still says that his popularity rating continues to be 84 percent,” Mr. Navalny said. “We need to think about what we need to do right now.” Ivan Nechepurenko contributed reporting from Vladimir, Russia, and Sophia Kishkovsky from Moscow.  A version of this article appears in print on , on Page A 6 of the New York edition with the headline: Opposition Leader Tests Public Support for Bid to Topple Putin . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Related Coverage Opinion Amie Ferris-Rotman The Teenagers Standing Up to Putin June 12, 2017 Image Kremlin Critic Aleksei Navalny Says Attack Left Him Mostly Blind in an Eye May 2, 2017 Image Thousands of Russians Present Letters of Protest in Demonstrations April 29, 2017 Image Show All Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              