   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Theater Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Review: Comically Currying the Boss’s Favor in ‘Enterprise’ Image Matthew Boston and Christopher Carley are ambitious executives in “Enterprise,” by Brian Parks. Credit Martha Granger Photography Enterprise Off Broadway, Comedy/Drama , Play 60 min. Closing Date: Sept. 22, 2017 Soho Playhouse , 15 Vandam St. 212-691-1555 More Information By  Andy Webster Sept. 14, 2017 Run “Glengarry Glen Ross” through a Monty Python spin cycle and you might get Brian Parks’s kinetic farce “ Enterprise ,” an absurdist express train of comic corporate-speak at the SoHo Playhouse. Four ambitious businessmen in a skyscraper — the bespectacled Weaver (Matthew Boston), the fresh-faced Sanders (Christopher Carley), the somewhat dim Owens (Jonathan Fishman) and the experienced Landry ( David Calvitto ) — entertain big dreams of impressing the unseen chairman of their imperiled company with a proposal that will send profit margins into the stratosphere. But over a night the men spend collaborating, then pairing off into two rival factions, their hopes rise and fall in a stream of bluster, invective and recriminations. Their exchanges arrive in a succession of 45 rapid-fire blackouts, many introduced with pings and other audio snippets (designed by Käri B. Berntson) that suggest, say, a text alert, or a news-radio bulletin, or an office copier. Among the many concerns preoccupying these fatuous climbers are the suspiciousness of uncentered mimeographs; the “smell” of diminishing value; the Depression-era allure of jumping out a window; and the perceived vulnerability of office toilet stalls. Conspicuously absent from the discussions are mentions of home, family or women — as spouses, relatives or colleagues. (“Astrology is astronomy for girls,” says Landry dismissively.) No surprise there: These men live only to compete with and impress one another (and their boss). No one else has any place in their displays of would-be brainpower and self-consuming testosterone. Though the characters played by Mr. Boston and Mr. Calvitto are more the alpha dogs, all of the actors demonstrate a crack sense of ensemble egalitarianism (Mr. Calvitto directed). The true star is Mr. Parks’s dialogue: If a joke doesn’t hit its mark (and some are simple non sequiturs), another one lands before you have time to notice. Mr. Parks, a former theater editor at the Village Voice and an ex-chairman of the Obie Awards, is noted for the fast pace of his work. “Enterprise” comes off a 2017 run at the Edinburgh Festival Fringe , where it won a Scotsman Fringe First Award . The playwright’s hapless executives may not qualify for a raise, but his “Enterprise” merits a promotion. Enterprise Soho Playhouse 15 Vandam St. TriBeCa/SoHo 212-691-1555 sohoplayhouse.com Category Off Broadway, Comedy/Drama , Play Runtime 60 min. Credits Written by Brian Parks; Directed by David Calvitto Cast David Calvitto, Matthew Boston, Christopher Carley and Jonathan Fishman Opened Sept. 10, 2017 Closed Sept. 22, 2017 This information was last updated on Nov. 6, 2017 Enterprise Through Sept. 23 at the SoHo Playhouse, Manhattan; 212-691-1555, sohoplayhouse.com. Running time: 1 hour 15 minutes. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page C 5 of the New York edition with the headline: Kinetic Comedy While Currying the Boss’s Favor . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              