   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index New York Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Kushners ‘Negotiating Now,’ Over Sale of Flagship Building Image The Kushner family has talked to numerous possible partners about investing in its flagship building, 666 Fifth Avenue. Credit Karsten Moran for The New York Times By  Charles V. Bagli April 9, 2018 Speculation over the fate of the Kushner Companies’ flagship Fifth Avenue office tower has replaced Monopoly as the favorite parlor game of the real estate set. The Kushners have attracted enormous public attention because of their connection to President Trump. Jared Kushner, Mr. Trump’s son-in-law, was chief executive of the company until he joined the White House last year as one of Mr. Trump’s key advisers. On Friday, Vornado Realty Trust, the Kushners’ partner in 666 Fifth Avenue, a 41-story office tower between 52nd and 53rd Streets, said that it had reached a “handshake” deal to sell its interest in the building to the Kushners. But how much the Kushners were paying and where the money might be coming from — the company, now led by Jared’s father, Charles Kushner, has been in a very public, three-year hunt for an investor to take over part of the building’s $1.4 billion mortgage — was still unclear. In an interview on Monday in his office on the 15th floor of the building, Charles Kushner declined to share details. “We’re finalizing a contract, which we’re negotiating now,” he said. Mr. Kushner sat with his wife, Seryl, and the president of his namesake company, Laurent Morali. Mr. Kushner acknowledged that he had abandoned plans to demolish the existing aluminum-clad office tower to make way for an 80-story, ultraluxury skyscraper designed by the architect Zaha Hadid. The tower was to include a lush retail mall, a high-end hotel and the pricey apartments, at a prime location in the city. That will not be built, he said on Monday. “It’s definitely not a knockdown,” Mr. Kushner said. “It’s definitely not the original plan.” So what is going to happen? “We don’t know what we’re going to do,” he said. “We’re weighing our options.” According to real estate executives who have spoken to the developer but who requested anonymity for fear of becoming embroiled in a dispute potentially involving Mr. Trump, Mr. Kushner plans to upgrade the office space at the base of the building and is considering converting the top floors into condominiums. But, anything Mr. Kushner does at 666 Fifth — renovate and sign new leases for the office space, create condominiums or some combination of the two — could cost hundreds of millions of dollars, at a time when most analysts say the building may not be worth as much as its mortgage. “It’s tough. It’s an iconic asset in a prime location, but it probably needs a substantial investment to compete with newer, shinier office product at Hudson Yards, downtown or near Grand Central,” John P. Kim, a real estate analyst at BMO Capital Markets, said of 666 Fifth. Stephen B. Siegel, chairman of global brokerage at CBRE Group, a real estate company, said, “It’s an eminently leasable office building, if updated to modern standards, from the lobby to the elevators.” But upgrades cost money, potentially $200 million, Mr. Siegel said. As for luxury condominiums, Jonathan J. Miller, a residential real estate appraiser, said that the challenge is that “the high end of the residential market has been overbuilt since 2014.” Very few Midtown office buildings trade hands so it is difficult to make a comparison between 666 Fifth and other deals. But real estate executives say that the building, which has a 30 percent vacancy rate, is worth anywhere from $800 a square foot to $1,000 a square foot, or as much as $1.4 billion — the amount of the mortgage. The clock is ticking on that loan, which comes due in February. Revenue from the building only covers about half of the annual payments, according to a financial report by Trepp, which tracks real estate debt. If he refinanced, Mr. Kushner could probably get a new mortgage at a lower interest rate than the current 6.3 percent. But experts say that Mr. Kushner would only be able to finance about 80 percent of the building’s value, or about $1.12 billion. He must also pay off his partner, Vornado Realty Trust, as much as $89 million. In 2012, when it became a partner in the building, Vornado agreed to invest up to $80 million in it at 11 percent interest. If bought out, Vornado would no longer be liable for its share of the mortgage, which amounts to $699 million, according to BMO Capital Markets. Vornado, however, would retain ownership of the building’s most valuable asset, most of the Fifth Avenue retail shops. Vornado declined to comment on Monday. The Kushners’ purchase of the building in 2007 for $1.8 billion announced their arrival into the rarefied ranks of New York real estate. But the leap into Manhattan from New Jersey, where the company owned a vast portfolio of garden apartments, has been fraught. Kushner Companies sold the valuable Fifth Avenue retail shops at the base of the building and lost some of its biggest office tenants in the recession. A year ago, Mr. Kushner and Anbang Insurance Group, a Chinese financial conglomerate with close ties to the country’s ruling circles, mutually agreed to terminate their discussions of a possible $4 billion deal. The deal foundered because of the publicity surrounding it, which the Chinese had hoped to avoid. But it also suffered from concerns raised by Democratic lawmakers that the deal could be a breach of federal ethics rules, because of Jared Kushner’s involvement in the negotiations before he went to the White House. Brokers and real estate executives who know him say that Mr. Kushner is “determined” to get a deal done that would leave him in control of the tower, which serves as the headquarters for his real estate empire. Mr. Kushner believes that he could have struck a deal long ago if not for the shadow of the Trump administration, people close to him say. “There’s a cloud because of the White House,” said Arthur J. Mirante, tristate president of Avison Young, an international real estate firm, and a friend of Mr. Kushner. “A lot of people just don’t want to deal with it.” A version of this article appears in print on , on Page A 22 of the New York edition with the headline: For Kushners’ 666 Fifth Avenue, No Deal Yet, and a Vague Future . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Related Coverage Kushner Partner in 666 Fifth Ave. Says It Has Deal to Sell April 6, 2018 Image No Deal Between Kushners and Chinese Company Over Fifth Avenue Skyscraper March 29, 2017 Image At Kushners’ Flagship Building, Mounting Debt and a Foundered Deal April 3, 2017 Image Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              