   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index College Basketball Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by In a Digital Age, the Whiteboard Keeps Its Spot on the Bench Image Whiteboards endure in basketball as coaches continue to admire their utility and portability, not to mention their durability (after a bad loss). Credit Grant Halverson/Getty Images By  Zach Schonbrun March 30, 2016 Of all the things that could distinguish the four teams remaining in the N.C.A.A. men’s basketball tournament — record, size, talent, experience — one factor may be undervalued: penmanship. In the locker room, coaches still rely on their handwriting to relay halftime adjustments on whiteboards that look as if they were appropriated from a seventh-grade classroom. The same is true on the bench, where, in courtside huddles, players try to keep up with frantic scribbles — the X’s and O’s that often result in blank stares. Even for college basketball’s most innovative minds, the only instrument with which to confer their strategic visions on the court is a felt-tipped pen, usually tethered by a string. For that reason, whiteboards remain an integral bench player, with myriad roles. Coaches toss them in losses, and players laud them after wins. North Carolina Coach Roy Williams writes numbers on them for motivation. Coach Chris Beard broke his hand punching one at an Arkansas-Little Rock game this month. Fortunately, Beard’s cast was a soft one; he could still draw during his team’s N.C.A.A. tournament games. Image The whiteboard was close at hand in Oklahoma Coach Lon Kruger’s huddle in a game against Oregon last weekend. Credit Harry How/Getty Images This old-school affinity between coach and calligraphy appears odder by the year, as other sports (and even the N.B.A.) have embraced the ease of technology. N.F.L. teams, for instance, have used tablets on the sideline since 2014, and the N.C.A.A. football rules committee recently permitted coaches to use electronics in the locker room at halftime. Major League Baseball announced a deal with Apple this week to provide every coaching staff with iPads, part of a technological evolution in which players duck into video rooms between at-bats to watch replays for instant analysis. But college basketball coaches continue to buck the temptation of technology for in-game adjustments. “It’s just part of the culture that you grew up with,” the Notre Dame assistant Rod Balanis said. “You have your dry-erase board and certain things that you do with it.” Some of this is not all the coaches’ fault. The N.C.A.A. prohibits the use on the bench of electronic equipment, which includes cellphones, tablets, computers and anything else capable of electronic transmission, a spokesman said. By contrast, the N.B.A. has loosened its restrictions on sideline technology. While electronic communication devices on the bench remain prohibited, laptops and tablets have been allowed since 2012 for scouting, for presenting information and even for reviewing video as long as those devices are not connected to an online network, an N.B.A. spokesman said. Although neither the N.B.A. nor the N.C.A.A. limits the use of electronics inside the locker room, most coaches stick to whiteboards in there, too. The North Carolina assistant C. B. McGrath said that while he had found that players responded to video for scouting purposes, he would be concerned about overloading them with too many visuals at halftime. “If you’re in the pros, guys might want to see where they were,” McGrath said, “while with college kids, they just sort of are like, ‘Yeah, I know I didn’t box out.’ ” White glass boards were introduced to the New York City school system in the late 1930s , although teachers complained that they were difficult to erase . It was not until the mid-1980s that modern dry-erase boards began customarily appearing in corporate offices and classrooms, along with markers that were a Japanese development, brought to the United States in the late 1950s. Almost as soon as whiteboards went mainstream, however, technology arrived to enhance or replace them. Touch screens went from an innovation to the mass market over the last three decades of the 20th century, with Xerox, Smart Technologies and Apple, among many others, making them and putting them in offices, classrooms and eventually the palm of people’s hands. That interface-free Magic Wall proudly displayed by CNN during its election coverage? That was created  by Jeff Han , a research scientist at New York University. A Final Four Cheat Sheet What got Oklahoma, Villanova, Syracuse and North Carolina to the Final Four in Houston? Reporters who spent the past week with them pull back the curtain to show what makes them tick. March 28, 2016 All the while, basketball coaches clung to their analog systems. L J Coney, a coach in Roxton, Tex., was said to be the first to consider stenciling court lines on a slab of chalkboard, in 1964. He asked an art teacher at the local school to help him with the design. “He started using them at basketball games, and soon his friends started asking him for them,” Coney’s daughter, Kenda, said by telephone on Tuesday. As a result, he founded a company, Korney Board Aids, that still sells dry-erase boards to college basketball teams across the country, including all four teams playing Saturday in the Final Four: North Carolina, Oklahoma, Syracuse and Villanova. “Basketball is a simple game; it really is,” Tim Welsh, an ESPN analyst and former coach, said. “You don’t want to overcoach it, and you don’t want to have them overthink it.” That is not to say there is no innovation. In 2011, Keith Rumjahn, a youth basketball coach and software developer in Toronto, decided to build a better way. His product, Coachbase, is now one of Apple’s top-selling sports apps, with more than 150,000 downloads. Clients include the former N.B.A. coaches Jeff Hornacek and Lionel Hollins, as well as Joe Whelton, a coach for the Liaoning Flying Leopards of the Chinese Basketball Association. Image Herb Sendek, seated right, diagrammed plays for his Arizona State players in the 2014-15 season. Credit Elaine Thompson/Associated Press The majority of Rumjahn’s clients, he wrote in an email, are youth coaches. But he encourages coaches at higher levels to go digital, too, if only to create a database in which thousands of hand-drawn plays can be stored. Through animation, plays can come to life, and they can then be saved to the cloud for retrieval as needed. “A lot of times coaches think the players understand what they’re saying, but that’s not true,” Rumjahn said. “Coaches draw these tremendously complex diagrams on a whiteboard, and the players lose track after the second line.” Nonetheless, the whiteboard endures. Coaches as well as players invent ways to put it to use. After a stunning comeback against Northern Iowa in the second round of the N.C.A.A. tournament, Texas A&M guard Alex Caruso burst into the locker room and wrote the word “believe” on the whiteboard, underlined and with two exclamation points. Williams, the North Carolina coach, has been writing the number of teams remaining in the tournament after each of his team’s wins, something he has done since 1991, he said. After the Tar Heels’ victory over Notre Dame on Sunday, reporters entering the North Carolina locker room found the number four on the whiteboard in large, bold print. “I guess that means we should keep your all’s butts out of the locker room,” Williams teased. “That’s something that we should be able to keep to ourselves.” Or he could just invest in another old-school instructional tool: an eraser. Correction :  Because of an editing error, an earlier version of this article misstated the tournament in which Arkansas-Little Rock Coach Chris Beard broke his hand by punching a whiteboard. It was the Sun Belt Conference tournament, not the N.C.A.A. tournament. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page B 11 of the New York edition with the headline: A Coaching Habit Hard to Erase . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Related Coverage That Spontaneous Buzzer-Beater Was Probably a Season in the Making March 29, 2016 Image Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              