   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Automobiles Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by In Flint, a New Bronze Age Hand-Built Hall of Fame 15 Photos View Slide Show  › Image Tim Galloway for The New York Times By  Lawrence R. Gustin Aug. 29, 2014 FLINT, MICH. — When Joe Rundell decided to become a sculptor at age 71, he didn’t get a lot of encouragement. A great-grandfather, he had already been retired for 20 years after three decades as a machine repairman at a General Motors engine plant. Also, he didn’t know how to make sculptures. But Mr. Rundell was intrigued by an idea being floated locally, to place bronze statues of automotive pioneers around Flint as reminders of the city’s central role in the development of the auto industry. Flint, after all, gave birth to General Motors and played a pivotal role in the development of the United Automobile Workers. It had been home to huge manufacturing plants including the vast Buick City complex, which employed some 30,000 workers at its peak, but closed for good in 1999. And while Flint has struggled in recent decades as most of those factories shut down and more than 70,000 G.M. jobs disappeared, the city still loves the cars it helped put on the road. Ten years ago, a Rockwell Automation retiree, Al Hatch, started Back to the Bricks, a gathering of antique auto clubs on Saginaw Street, the brick-paved main drag downtown. The event proved surprisingly popular, attracting several thousand vintage cars and many more spectators each year even though it is concurrent with the more famous Woodward Dream Cruise in suburban Detroit, an hour to the south. Hoping to instill more appreciation for Flint’s automotive heritage, Mr. Hatch came up with an idea: to place statues of the city’s important auto pioneers along Saginaw Street. He casually mentioned the idea to Mr. Rundell, who was intrigued. “When I told Joe we were thinking of doing these statues, he said, ‘Gosh, I think I could do that,’ ” Mr. Hatch recalled. While Mr. Rundell had no experience making statues, he was confident of his artistic talent — with good reason. Decades earlier, he had begun a sideline of engraving designs on expensive shotguns and rifles, acquiring an international reputation along the way. Wealthy gun collectors were paying him $30,000 to $60,000 to engrave elaborate hunting scenes on prized firearms. Glossy magazines and books featured his work in color layouts. He had also tried his hand at sculpting busts, including those of the Greek goddess Athena and of Quanah Parker, one of the last Comanche chiefs. How hard could it be to move on to large-scale statues? Mr. Hatch had seen the engravings, and when Mr. Rundell showed him the busts, he began to think he had found the artist to fulfill his vision. Mr. Rundell set out to learn about sculpting, hoping to get advice from the local art community, starting with what kind of clay to use. But, he says, he was greeted with derision. How come he was making these sculptures when other local artists already had experience? “I was basically told to go to school to learn, and ‘Don’t bother us,’ ” he recalled. Mr. Rundell, who is now 74, was not deterred. He was determined to make those statues, and he won over Mr. Hatch by making the first one without charge. But his lack of experience showed. When it came to materials, he made the wrong call — using water-based clay, which dries and cracks, rather than an oil-based variety. “With my first sculpture, I made all the mistakes I could possibly make,” he said. He eventually received solid advice from Mike Petrucci, who owns the Fine Arts Sculpture Centre in Clarkston, Mich., where the sculptures are cast in bronze. Despite the rocky start, the statues have been well received. John B. Henry, director of the Flint Institute of Arts, called Mr. Rundell’s work “a great job — it stands up well against work I’ve seen by some professional sculptors.” And Mr. Hatch is pleased. “I’m no expert, but the detail is good,” he said. “Joe works very hard to get the facial appearances right.” With hard times mostly behind it, central Flint is alive these days, thanks partly to colleges including the University of Michigan-Flint, which now has a residence hall downtown. Restaurants are busy. The Durant, an imposing 1920 hotel that had been shuttered 30 years, has been impressively restored with upscale loft apartments. Atwood Stadium, where Thanksgiving high school football games drew 20,000 fans in the 1940s and ’50s — and where Mark Ingram, who won the 2009 Heisman Trophy, played in high school — has been attractively refurbished. And now there’s a cluster of Mr. Rundell’s sculptures as well: David Buick, namesake of the Buick automobile; Louis Chevrolet, the daredevil Buick racer who gave his name to what became G.M.’s most popular vehicle line; and William C. Durant, the brilliant entrepreneur who made Buick and Chevrolet famous while also creating G.M. Durant, a promotional genius, has been largely forgotten on a national level, but he remains a historical hero here. Co-founder of the giant Durant-Dort Carriage Company here in the 19th century, he took charge of the faltering Buick Motor Company in 1904 and by 1908 had promoted it into the top ranks of automakers. He then created G.M. with Buick as its foundation. In 1910, bankers maneuvered control of G.M. away from him. So Durant founded Chevrolet, with little help from Louis Chevrolet himself, and built that company into a powerhouse that he used — remarkably — to regain control of G.M. Mr. Rundell’s statues of Durant, Buick and Chevrolet, close together downtown, were erected in 2012-13. Mark Reuss, currently G.M.’s head of worldwide product development, spoke at the Durant unveiling. Next, for display at Bishop International Airport here, Mr. Rundell produced a statue of Walter P. Chrysler, whom Durant made president of Buick nearly a decade before Chrysler went on to create his own auto company. Nearby, a recent statue of Charles W. Nash honors the onetime laborer whom Durant promoted to leader of the Durant-Dort Carriage Company before helping install Nash as president of Buick. Nash went on to become G.M. president before creating Nash Motors — which ultimately, as Nash-Kelvinator, merged with Hudson to form American Motors. Next in line for Mr. Rundell’s sculpting will be Albert Champion, the founder of AC Spark Plug, and then possibly Charles F. Kettering, the onetime top G.M. engineer whose name lives on in Flint at Kettering University (formerly known as the General Motors Institute), or Charles Stewart Mott, who made axles for Buick and became the city’s leading philanthropist. Labor leaders are likely to make the list as well. The Flint sit-down strike of 1936-37 led to G.M.’s recognition of the U.A.W. as its workers’ bargaining agent. Mr. Rundell provided his first statue, of David Buick, without charge, but he now charges $15,000 for a clay mold. With bronze work, a base and installation, the price of a statue totals nearly $50,000. No public money has gone into the project, according to Mr. Hatch, who said the funds came from donations as well as sales of memorabilia and memorial bricks. Not all of Mr. Rundell’s statues are auto-related. His newest, unveiled on Aug. 21, is also his first of a living person: Bobby Crim, the 82-year-old former speaker of the Michigan House who started a 10-mile running event 38 years ago that draws 15,000 participants to downtown Flint each summer. In the statue, Mr. Crim has both arms raised as if crossing the nearby finish line. And for his own amusement, Mr. Rundell is completing a sculpture of the “Mona Lisa.” He has, of course, only the painting as a guide — along with his imagination. While this is not the first time the “Mona Lisa” has been sculpted, Mr. Rundell’s version is nude except for the head scarf. “I like to keep ahead of things,” he said. “I might send it to Playboy.” This year, Mr. Rundell and his wife, Zadra, found a new project; they bought a mid-19th-century house that was once the home of Josiah W. Begole, Michigan’s governor in 1883-84. Over the years, the house — one of Flint’s oldest — had been stripped of copper and otherwise damaged, so it has become a major restoration project for the Rundells. But with its thick, squared-off pillars, the rambling Greek Revival structure is imposing, and the Rundells bought it at a bargain price of $139,000. It also has room for Mr. Rundell’s enthusiasms — engraved shotguns and vintage Kentucky rifles, tools, a library and a sculpture workshop. There is also plenty of room for his original clay statues, rescued from the foundry after they were cast in bronze. It’s a house with presence, a proper residence for Flint’s sculptor of automotive pioneers. A retired Buick spokesman, Lawrence R. Gustin is the author of four books, including “Billy Durant: Creator of General Motors,” “David Buick’s Marvelous Motor Car” and, with Terry B. Dunham, “The Buick: A Complete History.”  A version of this article appears in print on , on Page AU 1 of the New York edition with the headline: In Flint, a New Bronze Age . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              