   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Television Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by What’s On Monday By  Kathryn Shattuck June 23, 2014 10 P.M. (OWN) OPERATION CHANGE Former President Bill Clinton (above, in Zambia), Richard Branson, Elton John, the Dalai Lama, Harry Connick Jr. and other celebrities join Bill and Tani Austin and their son Steven Sawalich of the Starkey Hearing Foundation as they take on projects intended to improve lives in some of the world’s poorest regions. This 10-part documentary series begins in Haiti, where the fashion designer Donna Karan, the actress Maria Bello and the entrepreneur Bill Rancic work with organizations including World Wide Village, We Advance and Urban Zen to help survivors of the 2010 earthquake. (The Starkey Hearing Foundation distributes free hearing aids to people in need.) 2:30 P.M. (HBO Signature) WAG THE DOG (1997) Robert De Niro portrays Conrad Brean, a spin doctor who recruits a Hollywood producer (Dustin Hoffman) to help him create a fake war with Albania to distract the American public from discovering a presidential sex scandal. “It’s possible that viewers indifferent to political and media chicanery will miss some of the barbs here,” Janet Maslin wrote in The New York Times of this screwball comedy from Barry Levinson. “But those same gags will fill savvier audiences with wicked glee.” 5 P.M. (USA) THE GAME PLAN (2007) Dwayne Johnson, a.k.a. the Rock, left, plays Joe Kingman, a carefree quarterback who learns to love the young daughter, Peyton (Madison Pettis), he never knew he had. Roselyn Sánchez is the ballet teacher who instructs Joe in the dance of romance. “The movie is so likable that it glides over its many plot holes,” Matt Zoller Seitz wrote in The Times. 7 P.M. (Encore Family) THE NATURAL (1984) Robert Redford portrays Roy Hobbs, an aging baseball rookie who comes out of nowhere to save his team and redeem himself, in this Barry Levinson adaptation of the Bernard Malamud novel, set in Chicago during the 1920s and ’30s. Glenn Close plays Roy’s virtuous sweetheart, whom he left at home out West; Barbara Hershey is the siren who shoots him in the stomach with a silver bullet on his first night in the city. And Robert Duvall is the sports columnist with whom Roy makes a $100 bet: that he can strike out baseball’s reigning star, the Whammer (Joe Don Baker), on three pitches. Mr. Levinson and the screenwriters Roger Towne and Phil Dusenberry “transform something dark and open-ended — truly fabulous — into something eccentrically sentimental,” Vincent Canby wrote in The Times. 8 P.M. (ABC) THE BACHELORETTE Andi takes the eight remaining men to Italy, where six of them must take lie detector tests in a medieval castle in Monselice. 8 P.M. (Fox) MASTERCHEF The 17 home cooks must create a seafood menu befitting a beachfront wedding, with the losers challenged to prepare an all-American meal of steak and fries. 9 P.M. (HBO) THE CASE AGAINST 8 (2014) Using interviews and court-rehearsal video, Ben Cotner and Ryan White follow the legal challenge to Proposition 8, the 2008 referendum that banned same-sex marriage in California. Theodore B. Olson and David Boies are the lawyers leading that challenge; Kris Perry and Sandy Stier of Berkeley, and Paul Katami and Jeff Zarrillo of Burbank are the plaintiffs. “Although Mr. Cotner and Mr. White have been granted impressive access, from a dramatic standpoint, it’s hard not to wish that we could observe the legal gamesmanship on both sides,” Ben Kenigsberg wrote in The Times. “Still, ‘The Case Against 8’ functions as a valuable record of the nuts-and-bolts conference room side of advocacy — an aspect of civil rights work not often seen on screen.” 10 P.M. (13) WHEN I WALK (2013) Jason DaSilva, a successful documentary filmmaker who received a diagnosis of primary- progressive multiple sclerosis when he was just 25, chronicles his developing immobility across six years, from the moment his legs gave way during a 2006 Caribbean vacation to his inevitable use of a wheelchair. “Astonishingly, this is neither as depressing nor as arm-twistingly uplifting as you might expect,” Jeannette Catsoulis wrote in The Times about this film, presented here by “POV.” “Mr. DaSilva’s experience behind a camera shows in his brisk pacing, clear narrative structure and the awareness that a story of sickness needs lighthearted distractions.” 10:30 P.M. (TBS) CEELO GREEN’S THE GOOD LIFE Mr. Green and his longtime best friends Big Gipp, Khujo and T-Mo prepare to bring their hip-hop group, Goodie Mob, back to the stage. Eric Benét guest stars in this series premiere, which finds Mr. Green training to throw out the first pitch at a baseball game. KATHRYN SHATTUCK A version of this article appears in print on , on Page C 7 of the New York edition with the headline: What’s On Monday . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              