   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by CVS and Aetna Talks Take Place Under Amazon’s Shadow: DealBook Briefing Image Credit Spencer Platt/Getty Images By  Andrew Ross Sorkin , Michael J. de la Merced and Amie Tsang Oct. 27, 2017 Good Friday morning from Andrew Ross Sorkin in New York and Michael J. de la Merced and Amie Tsang in London. We’ve circled Nov. 6, the date on which the House is expected to begin debating amendments on the coming tax bill. More on that in a minute. A reminder: DealBook’s sixth annual conference, Playing for the Long Term, takes place on Nov. 9. Want to join us? Apply to participate here . Amazon’s growing empire stirs up more deal making More and more companies are asking themselves: What if Amazon comes for our business too? Potentially the biggest deal of the year, and maybe the biggest ever in the history of health insurance, is coming thanks in large part to moves by Jeff Bezos’s e-commerce behemoth. The St. Louis Post-Dispatch reported on Thursday that Amazon had gained licenses in 12 states to become a wholesale prescription drug distributor. That seems to have prompted the drugstore giant CVS to consider buying the medical insurer Aetna, a deal that could be worth more than $60 billion. Amazon has already made a big move into brick-and-mortar retail by buying Whole Foods Market. It’s making a play for the home with its Echo line of devices. And it has plenty of money to try new things: Its third-quarter revenue rose 29 percent from the same period a year ago, to $43.7 billion. “Size- and scale-wise, they can disrupt anywhere they want to disrupt,” Chip Davis, the head of a generic medicine trade group, said of Amazon to Bloomberg News . The strategic logic of a CVS-Aetna transaction From Andrew Ross Sorkin, Michael de la Merced and Katie Thomas, NYT : A larger company — CVS and Aetna have combined annual revenues of about $240 billion — could enjoy greater leverage in negotiations with drug companies, helping it defend itself against newcomers like Amazon. And from Dana Mattioli, Sharon Terlep and Anna Wilde Mathews, WSJ : CVS felt further compelled to make a dramatic move after federal antitrust regulators recently rejected rival Walgreens Boots Alliance Inc.’s proposed acquisition of Rite Aid Corp., a person familiar with the matter said. That solidified the view that the solution to intensifying competition must come from beyond traditional channels, this person said. The potential terms • CVS has offered to pay over $200 a share. Shares in Aetna rose 12 percent after the WSJ reported on the talks yesterday. • Plan on it having a big stock component, though the precise mix of cash to shares hasn’t yet been decided. The reaction • Robert Cyran of Breakingviews says that the potential deal could help CVS “resist Amazon’s entry into drug distribution, and the unpleasant side effects of transparency and low margins that may follow.” ( Breakingviews ) • Bloomberg Gadfly’s Max Nisen warns that any transaction “could still draw regulatory scrutiny and will be difficult to pull off.” ( Bloomberg Gadfly ) Keeping an eye on the calendar for the G.O.P.’s tax bill Image Credit Al Drago for The New York Times Republicans are a step closer to being able to overhaul the tax code without Democratic support — but the House vote on a 2018 budget resolution passed by only four votes. And debate still continues on potential limits for 401(k) contributions and deductions for state and local taxes. Representative Kevin Brady, Republican of Texas, the chairman of the House Ways and Means Committee, said that deductions for state and local taxes were not necessarily doomed. From Jim Tankersley and Tom Kaplan, NYT : “This is a serious issue, and we’re taking it seriously,” Mr. Brady said. Republican lawmakers from those states “made it clear they need this problem solved before they vote yes on tax reform,” he added. Now, keep these dates in mind ... Nov. 1: The House Ways and Means Committee will formally introduce the tax bill. Nov. 6: Debate on amendments begins. More tax points • The plan would probably include some limits on deductions for corporate debt interest payments — perhaps going from 100 percent deductibility to 70 percent deductibility — which isn’t as bad as some business executives had feared. ( Axios ) • Senator Joe Manchin III, Democrat of West Virginia, argued that the G.O.P. tax plan doesn’t track with what President Trump has promised. “I don’t think this is his tax policy,” the senator said. ( Axios ) • The Republican budget resolution required no mandatory cuts, and there isn’t much of an appetite to tackle spending at the moment. ( Politico ) Also in politics • Gary D. Cohn, the White House economic adviser, has raised the possibility of increasing federal gasoline tax to help pay for the administration’s $1 trillion infrastructure plan. ( Bloomberg ) • The Senate minority leader, Chuck Schumer, said he would block Mr. Trump’s trade policy nominees until the White House advanced a stalled effort to protect American metal producers from cheap Chinese products. ( NYT ) Activism led to the demise of Huntsman’s deal with Clariant Image Credit Huntsman,via European Pressphoto Agency Chalk up a win to White Tale, a joint venture between the hedge fund manager Keith Meister and the investment firm 40 North, which owns a 20 percent stake in Clariant. Other shareholders later added their opposition to the $15 billion deal. White Tale’s argument? The proposed merger had “no strategic rationale and is in fact a complete reversal of the company’s longstanding strategy of becoming a pure-play specialty chemicals company.” From today's joint statement by the C.E.O.s of Huntsman and of Clariant: “We believe that there is simply too much uncertainty as to whether Clariant will be able to secure the two-thirds shareholder approval that is required to approve the transaction under Swiss law.” Speaking of activists flexing their muscles • William Ackman won some support from Institutional Shareholder Services, the biggest proxy advisory firm around, in his push for change at the human-resources provider ADP. ( Bloomberg ) • Elliott Management’s private equity arm, Evergreen Coast Capital, has struck its first public company takeover: the $1.6 billion acquisition of the network software maker Gigamon. ( Gigamon ) The incredibly shrinking G.E. $235 billion. That’s the value of divestitures — including sales, spinoffs and the winding down of joint ventures — that G.E. has announced since the departure of Jack Welch as C.E.O., according to data that Thomson Reuters analyzed for us. That makes the company a net seller of businesses, having bought $218 billion during the same period. Keep that in mind as G.E., according to the WSJ , considers selling its century-old railroad business and its health care information technology business. Since Mr. Welch turned over the reins of the industrial stalwart, the sprawling empire that he built has proved unsustainable. That’s why John Flannery, G.E.’s new chief executive, told investors — after a terrible quarterly earnings report — that the company had identified up to $20 billion of assets that could be sold. Scenes from the Saudi conference: Uber and Virgin Galactic Image • Uber’s C.E.O. (and speaker at DealBook’s Playing for the Long Term conference), Dara Khosrowshahi, tweeted about his trip to the kingdom. • Mohammed al-Jadaan, the Saudi Arabian finance minister, said that instead of a full international listing, Saudi Aramco could sell stakes in itself to international investors. ( FT ) • Saudi Arabia has agreed to invest $1 billion in the Virgin Group’s space companies. ( CNBC ) Asia’s billionaire population is climbing The year 2016 marked the first time that more billionaires lived in Asia (637) than in the United States (563), according to the fourth annual UBS and PwC report on billionaires . American billionaires still control more overall wealth, at $2.8 trillion, however. Their Asian counterparts owned just under $2 trillion. What’s striking is that if current trends continue — particularly growth in Chinese property prices and the general increase in wealth of China’s and India’s middle classes — UBS and PwC say they expect Asia to outstrip the United States in overall wealth within four years. Of course, the report cautions, there’s still plenty of volatility in the Asian economic outlook. Earnings corner: tech and finance Image Credit Tom Grillo • Besides Amazon, Alphabet and Microsoft were other tech giants whose quarterly figures investors loved: Alphabet, Google’s parent company, dramatically exceeded expectations with $6.73 billion in profit, while Microsoft beat its own expectations with $6.58 billion in net income. ( NYT ) • K.K.R. ’s third-quarter adjusted earnings fell 33 percent from the same period a year ago, to $308.4 million, amid smaller gains in its private equity holdings. ( K.K.R. ) • Royal Bank of Scotland posted a better-than-expected profit for the third quarter. ( Reuters ) • UBS ’s 14 percent increase in profit came in below expectations. ( CNBC ) • Independent investment bank corner: Lazard ’s third-quarter adjusted profit was roughly flat at $112 million; Evercore ’s third-quarter adjusted earnings fell 2 percent, to $61 million; and Moelis ’s third-quarter adjusted profit rose 41 percent, to $36.3 million. ( Lazard Ltd. , Evercore Inc. , Moelis & Company ) One last thing: Musk responds to Sophia the robot The billionaire had a pithy response to the robot’s “interview” with Andrew: Image The Speed Read Policy and Legal • Harvey Weinstein sued the Weinstein Company on Thursday to demand access to records and emails, which he says he needs to defend himself. ( NYT ) • Mark Halperin is also facing several allegations of sexual harassment and will no longer work as an analyst for MSNBC’s “Morning Joe.” ( NYT ) • Deutsche Börse’s chief executive, Carsten Kengeter, will step down amid an insider trading scandal. ( NYT ) • The European Central Bank has begun to dismantle stimulus efforts, heralding “unabated growth momentum,” but the strategy is not without risks. ( NYT ) • The Securities and Exchange Commission is looking at a web of companies linked to an Argentine man who has done almost $1 billion of deals with Guggenheim Partners as part of a broader review into the investment firm, according to a person familiar with the matter. ( Bloomberg ) Banks and Banking • Goldman Sachs can’t seem to figure out what it wants to be, Stephen Gandel writes, adding that the bank’s efforts to pivot are making it look adrift, rather than on top of its problems. ( Bloomberg ) Private Capital (P.E. and V.C.) • Hong Ge, the head of Airbnb in China, resigned this week after the company learned about a personal relationship between him and another employee, which violated the company’s code of conduct, according to people with knowledge of the situation. ( The Information , Bloomberg ) • Heidi Roizen, a partner at Draper Fisher Jurvetson, which has launched an investigation into its co-founder after sexual harassment allegations, has defended the culture of the firm and said it was “patently wrong” that predatory behavior there was rampant. ( Recode ) Business and Economy • Laurel Powers-Freeling, a former adviser to the Bank of England, has been appointed nonexecutive chairwoman in Britain for Uber. ( Bloomberg ) • Hate speech and harassment are impeding Twitter’s ability to attract new users. ( NYT ) The company announced that it would ban RT and Sputnik, two Kremlin-backed international news outlets, from advertising on its platform. ( NYT ) It also said it had overstated its monthly user figures since 2014, while reporting that its net loss had narrowed in the third quarter. ( NYT ) • James B. Stewart thinks you’ve got to follow the bike trail to figure out where Amazon’s second headquarters are going to be. ( NYT ) • The hurricanes that struck Texas, Florida and the Caribbean in recent months have wiped out the profits of reinsurers. ( NYT ) Image Follow Andrew Ross Sorkin @andrewrsorkin , Michael J. de la Merced @m_delamerced and Amie Tsang @amietsang on Twitter.  Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              