   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Corrections Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Corrections: March 26, 2017 March 25, 2017 NATIONAL Because of an editing error, the “On This Day in History” feature last Sunday about thieves who broke into the Isabella Stewart Gardner Museum in Boston, committing one of the largest art heists in history, misstated the date on which a New York Times headline about the event appeared. The headline — “Boston Thieves Loot a Museum of Masterpieces” — was published on March 19, 1990 — not on March 16, 1961. SPORTS Because of an editing error, an article in some editions last Sunday about a middleweight boxing match between Daniel Jacobs and Gennady Golovkin misstated the consequences of Jacobs having skipped the weigh-in. It meant that Jacobs could not unify the four middleweight title belts if he won the fight; a split of the belts was not assured before the fight began. (Golovkin did, in fact, unify the belts by winning a unanimous decision.) METROPOLITAN The F.Y.I. column last Sunday, about the numbering of police precincts in New York, misstated the previous name of the Midtown South precinct. It was the 14th Precinct, not the 16th. • The F.Y.I. column on Feb. 26, about New York fire trucks with a steering wheel in the rear, referred incorrectly to when the city began using those trucks. They were not introduced in 1961, but had been operating decades before that. T: DESIGN A picture caption on Page 104 this weekend about men’s wear for spring, including different types of berets, misidentifies the designer of a beret shown on Page 110. It is an Albertus Swanepoel beret, not a Rothco one. ARTS & LEISURE An article last Sunday about politically themed documentaries misstated the awards history of “The Eagle Huntress.” It was shortlisted for an Oscar; it was not nominated. TRAVEL Because of an editing error, an article last Sunday about vacation rentals misidentified the company that a Barcelona host was affiliated with in 2013 when Matthieu Jost, the founder of Mister B&B, met her. The host was not affiliated with Airbnb. (Mr. Jost declined to identify the company.) • The Frugal Traveler column last Sunday, about the beer scene in San Diego, misspelled the name of a brewery. It is Mikkeller, not Mikkeler. • Because of an editing error, an article last Sunday about the Maison Vy hotel in Hoi An, Vietnam, misstated part of the name of the street that the hotel is on. It is Cua Dai, not Cura Dai. SUNDAY STYLES Because of an editing error, an article last Sunday about Donald Trump Jr. misstated the conservation status of the leopards in the Matetsi region of Zimbabwe, where Mr. Trump hunted. They are not endangered. • A picture caption on March 12 with the Scene City column, about several fund-raisers for the arts, misidentified the guests shown at one gala. They are J. Smith-Cameron, Kenneth Lonergan and Mary McCann. (It was not a photograph of Kecia Lewis, who attended an event but was not featured in the column.) REAL ESTATE A listing on the On the Market page last Sunday misstated the middle initial of Kyle Blackmon, an agent with Compass. He is Kyle W. Blackmon, not Kyle L. MAGAZINE An article on March 5 about the Department of Justice included outdated statistics. It is not the case that non-Muslim extremists have killed nearly twice as many Americans as radical Muslims since Sept. 11, 2001, according to the New America Foundation. That was true until the mass shootings in San Bernardino, Calif., and Orlando, Fla. Radical Muslims have now killed nearly twice as many Americans as non-Muslim extremists. • An article on March 19 about the growing opposition movement within the Democratic Party misstated Hillary Clinton’s Manhattan location on election night. She was at the Peninsula Hotel, not the Javits Convention Center. SUNDAY BUSINESS Because of an editing error, an article last Sunday about American small businesses’ fighting counterfeits on Alibaba’s sales platforms misstated the Chinese company’s relationship with a popular online payment system in China. The system, Alipay, is owned by a company controlled by Jack Ma, Alibaba’s executive chairman, not by Alibaba itself. • The Strategies column last Sunday,19 about how the stocks of managed care companies within the Standard & Poor’s 500-stock index have fared since the Affordable Care Act was signed into law, misstated, at one point, the surname of a director of the Kaiser Family Foundation, a nonprofit dedicated to health care policy. He is Gary Claxton, not Clarkson. BOOK REVIEW An essay last Sunday about Margaret Atwood’s Novel “The Handmaid’s Tale” misspelled the surname of the Canadian general who was the commander of the United Nations Assistance Mission for Rwanda at the time of the 1994 genocide in that country who later wrote a book about the episode. He is Romeo Dallaire, not Daillaire. • A review on March 5 about “Stalin and the Scientists: A History of Triumph and Tragedy 1905-1953,” by Simon Ings, misidentified the library in London notably frequented by Vladimir Lenin during his visits to that city in the early 20th century. It was the British Museum Library, not the London Library. SUNDAY REVIEW An opinion essay on last Sunday about the LSAT misidentified the law school at the University of Arizona. It is the James E. Rogers College of Law, not the James G. Rogers College of Law. The Times welcomes comments and suggestions, or complaints about errors that warrant correction. Messages on news coverage can be e-mailed to nytnews@nytimes.com or left toll-free at 1-844-NYT-NEWS (1-844-698-6397). Comments on editorials may be e-mailed to letters@nytimes.com or faxed to (212) 556-3622. Readers dissatisfied with a response or concerned about the paper’s journalistic integrity may reach the public editor at public@nytimes.com or (212) 556-8044. For newspaper delivery questions: 1-800-NYTIMES (1-800-698-4637) or e-mail customercare@nytimes.com . A version of this article appears in print on , on Page A 4 of the New York edition with the headline: Corrections . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              