   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Weddings Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Eileen Ahasic, Ian Bierig Image Credit Kristen Beinke Feb. 12, 2017 Eileen Rose Ahasic and Ian Alexander Harper Bierig were married Feb. 11 at the Conrad B. Duberstein Courthouse in Brooklyn. Chief Judge Carla E. Craig of the bankruptcy division of the United States District Court for the Eastern District of New York officiated. Mrs. Bierig, 33, is an executive director of global marketing for Estée Lauder in Manhattan, where she develops marketing strategies for the introduction of new skin-care products. She graduated from Northwestern and received an M.B.A. from Columbia. She is the daughter of Christine Berka-Ahasic of Brooklyn and C. A. Mark Ahasic of Darien, Conn. The groom, 34, works in Manhattan for Alexander Development Group, a residential and commercial property developer. He graduated from the University of California, Berkeley and received a master’s degree in real estate development from Columbia. He is the son of Darlene H. Bierig and Bob Bierig of Santa Barbara, Calif. The couple met in September 2011 at a viewing party at the Australian Bar in Manhattan for a University of California football game. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page ST 18 of the New York edition with the headline: Eileen Ahasic,  Ian Bierig . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              