   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Aramco Chief Says I.P.O. Is on Track for 2018: DealBook Briefing Image Amin Nasser talked with Andrew Ross Sorkin. Credit Nick Dunn By  Andrew Ross Sorkin , Michael J. de la Merced and Amie Tsang Oct. 23, 2017 Good Monday morning from Andrew Ross Sorkin in Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, and Michael J. de la Merced and Amie Tsang in London. Andrew spent Sunday in Dhahran taping a television interview for CNBC at Saudi Aramco’s headquarters with its C.E.O. ahead of the kingdom’s Future of Finance Initiative — known informally as Davos in the Desert — that starts Tuesday morning. Throughout the week, we’ll bring you all the back-room chatter and details about an Aramco I.P.O. A reminder: DealBook’s sixth annual conference, Playing for the Long Term, is on Nov. 9. Want to join us? Apply to participate here . Aramco Says It’s on Track for a 2018 I.P.O. But the question the Saudi oil giant has been careful to avoid answering is: Where will that offering take place? Amin Nasser, the oil giant’s chief executive, told Andrew that the listing remained on track and denied reports that it could be delayed or shelved in favor of selling private shares. Here’s an excerpt from the Nasser interview : “We have always said that we will be listing in 2018, and to be more specific, in the second half of 2018. However, I think journalists and writers — they are expecting more and more information, and we are governed by, you know, certain rules with regard to talking about the I.P.O. and all of that.” Note that Mr. Nasser doesn’t mention whether both parts of a potential Aramco I.P.O. — listings on both Saudi Arabia’s Tadawul exchange and on an international stock market like the N.Y.S.E. or the London Stock Exchange — are on track. He also denied that the company was talking with Chinese investors about a private placement. But do remember to parse those remarks: It is possible that the kingdom, not the company, would negotiate with the Chinese or others. The bottom line: Potential public market investors shouldn’t worry about Aramco’s historically opaque management structure. “I can say Aramco has always been run like a publicly traded company,” Mr. Nasser said. What About Kevin Warsh? Image We need to talk about Kevin Warsh. Credit Pool photo by Alastair Grant He wasn’t among the three people whom President Trump mentioned by name in an interview with Fox Business Network as a leading candidate for Federal Reserve chairman. For the betting types, here’s what Mr. Trump told Maria Bartiromo: “I’ve been seeing a number of people and most people are saying it’s down to two, Mr. Taylor, Mr. Powell. I also met with Janet Yellen, who I like a lot.” That may mean that John B. Taylor of Stanford University, who reportedly has the backing of Mike Pence, is the interest rate hawk more likely than Mr. Warsh to be nominated. The current rumor making its way around Washington is that Jerome Powell will be named Fed chairman and represent continuity with Ms. Yellen’s policies, while Mr. Taylor will be vice chairman. But as an unidentified White House official said of Mr. Trump to Jonathan Swan of Axios : “It’s never a done deal with this guy.” Let’s Talk About That Fourth Tax Bracket For a plan that White House officials publicly hope can be passed by year’s end, the proposed Republican tax overhaul still seems awfully in flux. The latest idea: creating what’s essentially a fourth tax bracket by giving those who earn at least $1 million a year a top marginal rate of 39.6 percent. Mr. Trump is on board with what he called a “fifth” tax bracket, for now. “If I feel that the middle class is not getting what I want them to get, and that’s going to be a lot, because I want them to get really a lot. Then I’m going to do a fifth bracket, which will give them more,” he told Fox News . But Grover Norquist of Americans for Tax Reform is livid, telling Axios : “This isn’t the dumbest idea I have ever heard of. But it is in the top 20.” Don’t forget about corporate taxes Top economists from the Obama administration took hard swings at arguments by the current Council of Economic Advisers in favor of reducing taxes for corporate America. Larry Summers wrote in The Washington Post this weekend: “The primary impact of a corporate tax cut would be to raise after-tax profits and the stock market. This in turn, as I noted, primarily benefits wealthy individuals.” ( WaPo ) And Jason Furman, a former head of the C.E.A., wrote in a Wall Street Journal op-ed: “A well-designed business-tax reform has the potential to raise productivity and wages. But this proposal is not well-designed, and flawed analysis only makes achieving well-designed reform less likely.” ( WSJ ) On the agenda this week • Ivanka Trump is headed to a town-hall meeting in Pennsylvania today to talk tax reform, and in particular to argue for expanding the child tax credit. • Mr. Trump is scheduled to attend Senate Republicans’ weekly policy lunch tomorrow to discuss taxes. A Veteran Venture Capitalist Joins Eduardo Saverin Howard L. Morgan was an early executive at Renaissance Technologies and co-founded the successful venture firm First Round Capital. Now he’s joining B Capital, the investment firm co-led by Eduardo Saverin of Facebook fame, reports Michael de la Merced . “Howard, at the end of the day, is a giant in the industry,” Mr. Saverin told Michael in an interview. “You can gain a tremendous amount of perspective just from speaking with him for a couple of minutes.” What Mr. Morgan will do: Help B Capital develop a culture — as he did at First Round — and offer guidance as the firm looks for new investment opportunities, particularly in Asia. New Troubles for Fox in Wake of O’Reilly Revelations? Remember what Fox is already dealing with: It’s seeking approval from the British government for its takeover of the broadcaster Sky, and the Justice Department is still investigating Fox News’s settlements with women who accused Roger Ailes of sexual harassment. So the huge report by Emily Steel and Mike Schmidt of the NYT on a $32 million settlement between Bill O’Reilly and a longtime network analyst has turned up the heat on Rupert Murdoch and his sons. What did the Murdochs know? From the NYT: Asked about the allegation of a nonconsensual sexual relationship, a representative for Mr. O’Reilly, Mark Fabiani, said that 21st Century Fox was “well aware” Ms. Wiehl had signed a sworn affidavit “renouncing all allegations against him,” adding that after receiving the document Fox News offered Mr. O’Reilly “a record-breaking contract.” Mr. O’Reilly tweeted that he will respond more fully today: Image And then there was Fidelity Two longtime employees at the mutual fund giant, Gavin Baker and Robert Chow, were fired or resigned this month after accusations of sexual harassment, according to Sarah Krouse and Kirsten Grind of the WSJ . Brian Hogan, president of Fidelity’s stock-picking division, held an emergency meeting to stress the firm’s “zero tolerance policy.” From the WSJ: The issue of workplace conduct has been simmering within Fidelity’s stock-picking unit in particular for years. A 2015 internal report warned of cultural problems particularly adverse for women, according to interviews with more than a dozen former Fidelity analysts and portfolio managers. More must-reads • Susan Fowler sat down with Maureen Dowd for her first interview since blowing the whistle on harassment at Uber: “I knew I had to be super-careful about how I said it if I wanted anybody to take it seriously.” ( NYT ) • Amazon is doing some soul-searching after Roy Price, now the former leader of Amazon Studios, was accused of harassment. ( NYT ) • Jim Rutenberg of the NYT looks at the widespread use of nondisclosure agreements that helped hide many of these sexual harassment accusations. ( NYT ) Abenomics Will Continue The Nikkei 225 closed up 1.11 percent — to its highest point since 1996 — in the wake of Shinzo Abe’s commanding victory. Motoko Rich of the NYT writes, “With the economy slowly improving, voters also seemed willing to accept Mr. Abe’s plan to raise a consumption tax that he has vowed to apply to child care and free university and college tuition.” Peter Tasker of Arcus Research writes in the Nikkei Asian Review that it isn’t clear whether the Bank of Japan governor, Haruhiko Kuroda, will stay on for another five-year term. But it’s likely that any successor would maintain the current fiscal policy. In other global monetary news • The euro has quavered as investors watch for a response from Catalan separatists to Prime Minister Mariano Rajoy’s move to stamp his authority on the region. ( Bloomberg ) • In Argentina, President Mauricio Macri gained ground in congressional midterm elections. Improved prospects for his Cambiemos alliance have helped pull up the peso and Argentine bonds. ( Bloomberg ) The Speed Read M.&A. • The online lender SoFi explored selling itself earlier this year for as much as $10 billion, but couldn’t find any takers at that price, according to people familiar with the matter. ( FT ) • Carlyle has joined the takeover battle for the fund business at Old Mutual Global Investors, joining two Australian financial services groups and TA Associates, according to people close to the process. ( FT ) • Cisco is close to buying Broadsoft, a software maker with a market value of about $1.7 billion, according to people with knowledge of the situation. ( Bloomberg ) • Anbang Insurance Group has resumed sales of the high-yield investment products that financed its global acquisition spree, suggesting that regulators intend to throw a lifeline to the group. ( FT ) • Potlatch is near to an all-stock deal to combine with Deltic Timber, according to people familiar with the matter. ( WSJ ) Policy and Legal • The European Central Bank is expected to begin unwinding its monetary stimulus program and a tighter policy could bolster the value of the euro and the currencies that track it. ( WSJ ) Banks and Banking • The next generation of Wall Street titans thinks that learning Python is more important than learning Mandarin. ( Quartz ) • Morgan Stanley’s Ted Pick, who is considered a potential successor to James Gorman as C.E.O., has been credited with helping the bank to beat Goldman Sachs in revenue from trades. ( FT ) I.P.O.s and Offerings • Qatar’s sovereign wealth fund is in talks about taking a stake in the Russian power group, EN+, which is seeking to raise $1.5 billion in an initial public offering. ( FT ) Business and Economy • Tesla could be the first foreign automaker to build a wholly owned manufacturing operation in China. ( NYT ) • In related news, China’s state chemical group is among the bidders for a $4 billion stake in SQM, one of the world’s largest producers of lithium, a key component in the batteries of electric cars. ( FT ) • Jordan Belfort has dismissed the craze for initial coin offerings as “the biggest scam ever” and one that is bound to “blow up” in people’s faces. ( FT ) • Nearly all big tech companies have an artificial intelligence project, and they are willing to pay experts millions of dollars to help get the job done. ( NYT ) • Huge warehouses are being built, fueling a demand for lower-skilled workers and reviving areas that once relied on manufacturing. ( NYT ) Follow Andrew Ross Sorkin @andrewrsorkin , Michael J. de la Merced @m_delamerced and Amie Tsang @amietsang on Twitter.  Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              