   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Fashion & Style Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by How Organic Avenue Lost All Its Juice Image A customer reading a handwritten closure notice posted on the door of an Organic Avenue store on 40th Street and Avenue of the Americas. Credit Christian Hansen for The New York Times By  Katherine Rosman Nov. 4, 2015 As recently as last month, one could hardly throw a lentil in New York City without hitting an Organic Avenue storefront, with its orange banner, stick-figure logo and promise of better living through $9 cayenne-infused lemonade. Kat Schamens , a yoga teacher and fitness-apparel designer, liked it that way. “I would always think, ‘I can’t wait to go in and get my chickpea soup,’ ” she said. In mid-October, Ms. Schamens learned that Organic Avenue’s 10 stores had been shuttered and that the company had filed for bankruptcy. “I kind of freaked out,” she said. “I was distraught. I lost my yoga for a minute.” Hannah Kerin, a fitness enthusiast who loved her ritual of going to Organic Avenue for a raw sunflower-seed falafel after yoga class on the Upper East Side, was among many people posting mournful pictures on Instagram. “I may never taste you again :((((( RIP organic avenue,” she wrote under a photo of Pina Love unpasteurized juice. In a city where health-food companies like Juice Press and Sweetgreen seem to be thriving, how did this former fashion-world darling — gushed about by Gwyneth Paltrow, vaunted by Vogue and dutifully slurped by commuters along the Equinox axis in Manhattan — fall so far? Organic Avenue began in 2002 as a community space for organic-themed events and retail products, run from a Lower East Side loft by Denise Mari. The offerings gave rise to a homemade cold-pressed juice delivery service. Ms. Mari, now running Mari B & B , a “bed and cleanse” in Westhampton Beach, N.Y., declined to be interviewed by phone but wrote via email, “I became a vegetarian in 1993, and had a dream and vision to help others achieve a balanced healthful plant-powered compassionate lifestyle.” Image Denise Mari, founder of Organic Avenue. Credit Douglas Young Doug Evans, her former boyfriend and an entrepreneur, helped fund and scale this sideline into a formal business, promoting raw organic food and juice made by a process called cold pressing, which slowly removes juice from the fibrous body of a fruit or vegetable and is said to retain more nutrients in the juice than that made by more traditional blending methods. Mr. Evans, now at work on another juice-related business , declined to speak on the record, but emailed this statement: “Organic Avenue helped to start a movement to provide better access to high quality, organic foods and juices. The decision made by the new owners to close its doors does not reflect the support that Organic Avenue customers have for the brand, nor does it represent a decline in people’s interest in better nutrition and juicing.” As a downtown crowd of artists and models balanced long nights of extreme revelry with long days of extreme diet and fitness, Organic Avenue became more of a destination, opening its first street-level shop in 2006 on Stanton Street and offering, among à la carte items, juice cleanse programs that might entail forgoing solid food for anywhere from one to five days in favor of concoctions made from blue-green algae, beets and the like. In 2009, Organic Avenue benefited from a chance meeting between Stephanie Winston Wolkoff, who had previously served as Vogue’s director of special events and was to become the founding fashion director of Lincoln Center (a New York Fashion Week venue), and Eric Cahan, who was photographing her at her home in Quogue, N.Y., for the cover of Hamptons magazine. Mr. Cahan, also an artist, was an early investor in Organic Avenue, and spoke excitedly about what it offered. Ms. Wolkoff began doing the Organic Avenue cleanses. She liked how she felt. She said, “I believed in the brand,” which was known for its fat-bottom glass bottles that could be returned for a refund on a $2 deposit and its canvas orange bags, sturdy enough to bear the weight of copious liquid kale. She spread the word to her colleagues. From there came the inevitable trickle-down to fashion designers, philanthropists, actors and others who live by the adage that nothing tastes as good as skinny feels. Ms. Paltrow promoted the products on Goop . An Organic Avenue pop-up shop appeared during fashion week in the grand foyer of what was then known as Alice Tully Hall. Dietary trends don’t often result in the creation of franchises in one of the most expensive cities in the world. But as New York regained its economic footing after the recession of 2008, people who perhaps didn’t feel comfortable splurging on five days at a spa could choose a more reasonably priced indulgence like a five-day juice cleanse. Image An employee at an Organic Avenue store in Chelsea stocking the juice cases in April 2013. The chain’s 10 stores were closed last month and the company has filed for bankruptcy. Credit Michael Falco for The New York Times And before long, a dozen Organic Avenue outposts could be found from Chelsea to the Upper East Side, and from Southampton to Roslyn, N.Y. Competition was, well, healthy. Juice Press came along in 2010, more rooted in athletics and fitness (an early investor was the Yankees first baseman Mark Teixeira) than fashion; it now has more than 30 locations. In California, Pressed Juicery took root. By 2012, the juice field, so long dominated by hippies, had been visited by technology, in the form of high-pressure processing, which gives cold-pressed juice a shelf life of more than 30 days. Though this type of processing is shunned by purists like the founding team of Organic Avenue, it has helped make cold-pressed juice more widely available, and at a lower cost. Suja, a brand that was created in 2012 , is now sold at Target, where some of its products cost $4. (This year, Coca-Cola invested $90 million in Suja.) In December 2012, the Hain Celestial Group bought BluePrintCleanse, for more than $28 million in cash, in addition to stock. Organic Avenue also enjoyed an infusion of capital. By the end of 2012, after having made a few smaller investments in the company, the private equity firm Weld North closed on a controlling majority. In total, Weld North paid Ms. Mari, Mr. Evans and investors undisclosed millions. Weld North was founded by Jonathan Grayer, the former chief executive and chairman of Kaplan, the educational services company. (The name Weld North refers to his dormitory at Harvard College.) At the time, Organic Avenue was generating about $20 million in revenue and scant, if any, profit, according to former investors. Regardless of the brand hype, “the good old days never existed,” a former investor said. Weld North’s plan was to add more food to the menu and to increase the scale of the business — to do for green juice what Starbucks did for cappuccinos — but the company struggled with high real-estate costs and wasted inventory. Raw organic produce is highly perishable, and Organic Avenue’s garbage cans were known among Dumpster divers to be filled with juice and food that was still edible past the sell-by dates . The loyalty of devotees like Ms. Schamens and Ms. Kerin notwithstanding, there is an admitted emperor’s new clothes quality to paying $25 for a lunch of vegetable shavings and a smoothie made of Swiss chard, cashew milk and Himalayan salt. “You can’t get people to crave this food,” the former investor said. “You can’t build a long-term business off what Gwyneth Paltrow likes.” Some researchers began to publish studies questioning the necessity and safety of juice cleanses. And the fashion world started to feel pushback from nutritionists and eating-disorder activists against its support of juicing in early 2013, after the Council of Fashion Designers of America announced a 50 percent discount for models on Organic Avenue juices during New York Fashion Week. By summer 2015, prospects began to look grim. Organic Avenue had already closed two outposts: a kiosk in a mall in Roslyn and a store in SoHo. Then, earlier this year, Weld North sold its interest in the company to another firm, Vested Capital Partners . “The private equity guys didn’t seem to understand our customers or our brand,” Ms. Mari wrote in an email, adding, “They overlooked the contribution of the founders.” Under the leadership of Vested Capital, operations fell into chaos, said Tirsa Messon, an Organic Avenue employee for nearly two years who handled payroll. Bills for hundreds of thousands of dollars to suppliers could not be paid, she said. Employees were not paid for their last week of work. Checks compensating some employees for their previous two weeks of work bounced, she said. “I have over 100 people calling my cellphone asking where their money is,” she said. “It’s horrible what’s been done.” Vested’s principal executive, William Tkacs, did not return calls for comment. “That’s just the way bankruptcy works,” David Schwinger, Mr. Tkacs’s lawyer, said of the payment stoppages. In the meantime, the fashion world has moved on to new forms of nourishment. “I don’t think a lot of people I know are doing juice cleanses anymore,” said Mr. Cahan, the artist and photographer who sold his stake in Organic Avenue to Weld North. (“I did very well,” he said.) “A lot of vegans I know are now making stews out of meat bones and dairy.” Ms. Wolkoff who now runs her own agency that creates collaborative relationships and strategic partnerships, soured on Organic Avenue before it shut down, favoring Juice Press smoothies. And she has lost interest in cleanses altogether, focusing instead on learning more about the latest trends in wellness, like juices that include sooty substances said to absorb toxins in the body. “Everyone is talking about coal and charcoal ,” she said.  Continue reading our fashion and lifestyle coverage on any of these accounts: Styles on Facebook , Modern Love on Facebook , Styles , Fashion and Vows on Twitter and Fashion on Instagram . Please sign up here to receive our NYT Living newsletter. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page D 1 of the New York edition with the headline: How Organic Avenue Lost All Its Juice . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              