   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Technology Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by From a Classical Pianist, an App Lets You Graft Your Voice Onto Actual Hit Songs Image The pianist Robert Taub, right, and Jon Sheldrick, an executive at Mr. Taub’s firm, MuseAmi. Credit Jake Naughton/The New York Times By  James Barron July 20, 2014 It is not, said the pianist turned software entrepreneur Robert Taub , a karaoke app with video. Instead his new app, Hook’d , creates what he described as “musical selfies,” in which only the voice track sounds like the user. Unlike singalong apps that play covers — renditions of hit songs rerecorded by anonymous studio musicians — Hook’d features everything from the original recording except the voice track. So someone who chooses “Classic” by MKTO will hear the same backing track that Malcolm Kelley and Tony Oller heard in the studio. On “Love Shack,” a Hook’d user will be accompanied by the real B-52s. Users who are hazy about the words need not worry. Hook’d shows the lyrics on the cellphone screen, above the image being recorded as they sing. And if they want more guidance, they can listen to — but not record — the original lead vocalist. Hook’d had 42 songs when it started on July 10 as a free app for iPhone and iPod Touch; Mr. Taub said that more songs would be added in the next few weeks. His company, MuseAmi , based in Princeton, N.J., negotiated with the three major recording companies, Warner Music Group, Sony and Universal Music Group. MuseAmi also worked out deals with the music publishers that represent the songs’ writers and composers. Image With Hook’d, for iPhone and iPod, users can replace the voice tracks on songs with what its designers call “musical selfies.” Credit Jake Naughton/The New York Times For record industry executives, reaching a new audience has been a challenge as CD sales have plunged and digital downloads leveled off — and as social media apps have surged. Executives from Warner Music Group said that Hook’d offered a novel way to distribute the songs in its catalog and generate attention for its artists. Hook’d builds on technology from MuseAmi’s first app, ImproVox , introduced in 2010 to help singers who probably should not perform outside the shower. Real-time digital signal processing corrects those who are off key. Hook’d also has other studio effects that users can apply before they share their performances on Hook’d’s YouTube channel or on Facebook and Twitter. Hook’d began as a singalong app, but evolved after a focus group session with high school students in New Jersey last fall. The students realized they could share their performances with their friends by sending out links, Mr. Taub said. “We knew that, but to them it was of paramount importance, so it was of paramount importance to us.” Another revelation came when Jon Sheldrick, MuseAmi’s principal product manager, realized that most users did not care about singing along to a full song, only the chorus, for 30 seconds in all. Access to the choruses is free. A subscription with access to the full songs is $3.99 a month. The repertoire on Hook’d is different from the sonatas and concertos Mr. Taub, 58, performed as a pianist. But he said he had made videos of tracks like the Monkees’ “Daydream Believer” on Hook’d — under an alias. So how is his voice? “Worse than you’d think,” he said. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page B 5 of the New York edition with the headline: From a Classical Pianist, an App Lets You Graft Your Voice Onto Actual Hit Songs . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              