   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Weddings Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by A Law School Dropout Drops Back In Image Credit Ben Robinson By  Nina Reyes July 1, 2017 Matthew Donald Barge and Thomas Preston Bottomy were married June 26 at the Manhattan Marriage Bureau. Angel L. Lopez, a staff member of the New York City Clerk’s office, officiated. On July 6, the couple will exchange vows and rings at a ceremony in Pont de Molins, Spain, that will be led by Andreas Sotiropoulos, a friend of the couple. Mr. Barge (left), 34, is a co-executive director of the Police Assessment Resource Center, an organization in Manhattan and Los Angeles that independently monitors law-enforcement agencies. He graduated summa cum laude from Georgetown and received a law degree from N.Y.U. He is the son of Barbara A. Barge and Corey D. Barge of West Linn, Ore. The groom’s father is the owner of two plastics manufacturers, Axiom Industries in Durham, Ore., and Griffith Polymers in Tualatin, Ore. His mother is an accountant for her husband’s companies. Mr. Bottomy, 38, is known as Preston. He is the vice president and general manager for men’s wear in the e-commerce division of Walmart; his office is in Hoboken, N.J. He graduated summa cum laude from Princeton and received an M.B.A. and a law degree from Stanford. He is a son of Patricia Cowan Bottomy and Dr. Michael B. Bottomy of Nashville. The groom’s mother retired as the marketing director in Nashville for the Worth Collection, a women’s clothing company in New York. His father is a pathologist at St. Thomas Hospital in Nashville. The couple initially met when both began law school in fall 2004. Mr. Barge thinks that they may have had a brief conversation once, possibly at one of the Stanford gyms, but they concur that they knew each other only vaguely. And then Mr. Barge dropped out, before the first semester was over though too late to receive a tuition refund. It was surprising to those who remained, and rumors soon circulated. “I think there were two people who didn’t finish in our class,” Mr. Bottomy said. “It’s super-rare.” Mr. Barge said that he had gone straight to law school from college and was having second thoughts. “I was barely 21 and not sure that law school was for me, let alone not knowing what I wanted to do when I grew up,” he said. He had a series of jobs, including a long-term position with the organization that he now runs, and eventually decided that law school was right for him after all. In 2009, he began at N.Y.U., and the next year, at the birthday party of a friend, he recognized Mr. Bottomy. “I said something like: ‘I know you. You went to Stanford,’” he said. “But he didn’t recognize me. It didn’t click.” Mr. Barge, it must be said, had long, thick, curly hair when he was at Stanford, and it had made him stand out. “Now he looks completely different,” Mr. Bottomy said. The two found plenty to engage them immediately, with their grounding in common experience, and quickly found things to admire about each other too. “Preston is constantly enthusiastic about absolutely everything,” Mr. Barge said. “I tend to be a bit more reserved and more in my head, and think weighty things, do weighty things for a job, and talking with him and spending time with him, there’s something very magnetic.” Mr. Bottomy found that they both loved travel and adventure and dining and New York. “We can just sit down and talk about things forever,” he said. “And the way we travel: We don’t see the sights, we just sit at cafes and people-watch and ignore the churches that everyone else is going to see.” It seems, however, that while Mr. Barge had been a shadowy figure to Mr. Bottomy at Stanford, a mythology had developed around his mysterious departure, helped in no small part by his abundant and memorable locks. Some time after the two had begun dating, Mr. Bottomy ran into a Stanford classmate, and when she learned that Mr. Bottomy was now seeing Mr. Barge, his former classmate said: “Oh my God! He’s the guy who dropped out of school to become a hair model!” A version of this article appears in print on , on Page ST 12 of the New York edition with the headline: A Law School Dropout Drops Back In . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              