   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Politics Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by In an Age of Terror, an Early Start on the Presidential Transition Image President Obama boarded Marine One as he departed the White House for a trip to Saudi Arabia on Tuesday. Credit Doug Mills/The New York Times By  Julie Hirschfeld Davis April 20, 2016 WASHINGTON — At a luxurious hilltop estate with sweeping vistas of the Hudson River, an adviser to President Obama began meeting on Wednesday with aides to the candidates vying to replace him to make the first, early preparations for the day when Mr. Obama leaves office. During a two-day gathering on the grounds of Kykuit , the manor built by John D. Rockefeller, they will attend breakout sessions, working lunches and dinners, and white-board-assisted discussions on how to execute a seamless transfer of power in an age when the threat of a terrorist attack like the one on Sept. 11, 2001, requires a fully functioning White House at all times. That need was brought home forcefully to President George W. Bush after 9/11, and his concern that his successor lose no time in taking the reins of power led to what is regarded as a model transition when it was time for him to leave office. Now, in an acknowledgment that its time is running out, the Obama White House has begun planning for the next transition, a task akin to a giant corporate merger, but one that involves the federal government’s 4,000 senior executives and a $4 trillion budget. And it will all be compressed into the 72 days between the election on Nov. 8 and the Jan. 20, 2017, inauguration. “It is the most complex, most difficult takeover on the planet today, and probably in history,” said Max Stier, the founder and president of the Partnership for Public Service, the nonprofit group that is hosting the retreat and has established a Center for Presidential Transition to guide the process from the outside. Mr. Stier declined to discuss the details of the meeting, including its participants, saying it was designed to provide a “safe space” for frank and confidential discussions about the transition process. But he said it was vital that the preparations begin now, removed from the chaos and rancor of the presidential campaign and the pressures of a White House bent on pressing Mr. Obama’s agenda while there is still time. “Campaigns were always loath to do early or aggressive pre-transition planning for fear that they will be accused of measuring the drapes or being presumptuous, so they ended up doing it at the last minute,” said Mr. Stier. “And the White House doesn’t want to be viewed as lame duck, but they also, as stewards of our government, really need to ensure that the handoff is as thorough and clean as possible.” Image Kykuit, the manor built by John D. Rockefeller, in Pocantico Hills, N.Y., in September 2007. Credit Alan Zale for The New York Times Mr. Obama began pressing his senior advisers to begin planning for the transition late last fall, telling them he wanted to take the process seriously and match or exceed the job done by Mr. Bush, to whom he and his team give high marks for a well-executed handover in January 2009. “He indicated that he wanted this to be a serious process,” Anita Decker Breckenridge, Mr. Obama’s deputy chief of staff for operations and the point person on the process, said in an interview. Ms. Decker Breckenridge was herself the beneficiary of memorandums, briefing books and other materials prepared by Mr. Bush’s departing staff members that she called invaluable when she began work on Mr. Obama’s first day in office as the chief of staff at the National Endowment for the Arts. The president “wants to do the same, if not better, for the next administration,” Ms. Decker Breckenridge said he told her. “This is just, at its core, good democracy, good government, and it’s critical.” Denis McDonough, Mr. Obama’s chief of staff, convened a meeting of the cabinet last month to begin thinking through plans for the transition, and Ms. Decker Breckenridge has begun meeting weekly with Andrew Mayock, a senior adviser at the Office of Management and Budget, to compare notes and go through task lists. Mr. Mayock will attend this week’s meetings in New York. Fear as a Motivator It was fear that drove Mr. Bush to plan early and carefully for an effective transition after terrorist attacks disrupted his presidency less than eight months after he took office, according to the former senior officials who executed the transition plan. “We talked about 9/11 and, ‘Thank goodness it was Sept. 11 and not Feb. 11 because we would have been completely incapable of dealing with it then,’ ” said Clay Johnson III, a top Office of Management and Budget official in Mr. Bush’s White House who was a central player in his 2000 transition into office and his 2008 handover to Mr. Obama. “There are just so many more things that a new president has to be prepared for and say grace over now, it’s just the nature of our world.” Image Mr. Obama told senior advisors he wanted the transition process to match or exceed the job done by his predecessor, George W. Bush, right, on Inauguration Day in 2009. Credit Damon Winter/The New York Times In its 2004 report, the independent 9/11 commission noted that Mr. Bush did not have his full complement of senior officials in place until six months after he took office, creating a dangerous situation that could be exploited in the future. Mr. Bush took the issue to heart, telling his top advisers as early as 2007 that they were to begin planning for the handover. “He told me this is the first transition in modern American history when the homeland has been under threat, and we need to make sure that it’s as good as it can possibly be,” said Joshua B. Bolten, his chief of staff at the time. Mr. Bolten, who had been a low-level aide to the elder President George Bush, recalled how his transition out of office in 1993 — like those of his predecessors — had been relatively “thin” and poorly planned. “It’s different now because we’re vulnerable, and we are essentially under attack here at home from terrorist elements,” Mr. Bolten said the younger Mr. Bush indicated. “There’s a particular moment of vulnerability as we switch over that terrorists may want to try to take advantage of.” Planning Ahead Mr. Bush’s advisers handed Mr. Obama’s aides detailed memorandums on policy issues and agency work plans after the election. They also collaborated on a tabletop exercise one week before Mr. Obama’s inauguration in which they postulated several simultaneous explosive attacks on American cities, and sat side by side in the Situation Room gaming out how the government would respond. Since then, Congress has enacted legislation to codify some elements of the Bush-Obama transition process. Mr. Obama signed the most recent revisions into law without fanfare last month, and they are guiding Ms. Decker Breckenridge’s lengthy to-do list. Image Anita Decker Breckenridge, left, the point person on the transition process, and Josh Earnest, Mr. Obama’s press secretary, departed the White House on Tuesday. Credit Doug Mills/The New York Times The measure sets an early May deadline — six months before Election Day — for the president to create a transition coordinating council at the White House and a transition directors council for federal agencies, each of which must appoint a senior career employee to manage the handoff. Well before those dates, the National Archives and Records Administration — which by law must take custody of all the departing president’s records by 12:01 p.m. on Jan. 20 — has to begin copying a vast amount of digital material to its servers. The job has grown exponentially larger in recent years as the White House has become increasingly wired and data driven. (When Mr. Obama took office, there were fewer than a dozen laptops in use at the White House; now, nearly every employee has one.) While the Clinton administration produced roughly three terabytes — or trillions of bytes — of records, including 20 million emails, the Bush administration eight years later had to transfer about 80 terabytes, including 200 million emails. The archives administration projects that this president will turn over two and a half times as much: 200 terabytes. Recognizing the magnitude of the job, the White House resolved to begin the process, which involves copying the large files of email records, photographs and videos that have become a staple of White House communications during Mr. Obama’s term, several months earlier than in the past. It is expected to commence this month. Cautionary Tales A smooth transition has not always been a priority, and there are cautionary tales. In 2002, the General Accounting Office reported that “ damage, theft, vandalism and pranks ” had occurred at the White House during the transition from Bill Clinton to Mr. Bush, including several instances of computer keyboards missing their “W’s.” But presidents and candidates have a powerful interest in an effective transition. “You want to protect the presidency as an institution, and you also want to use transition as part of your legacy — you want to go out well,” said Martha Joynt Kumar, whose 2015 book, “Before the Oath,” dissects the 2008 transition. “For the campaigns, the impetus comes from wanting to be able to govern on Day 1. The beginning of an administration is when you have the greatest opportunity to bring about change but the least capacity to figure out how to do it.” Being Ready It is not yet clear, however, how much the presidential campaigns are prioritizing the transition. Hillary Clinton, who has not yet selected anyone to lead transition planning, sent a midlevel policy staffer to this week’s meetings. Bernie Sanders tapped Michaeleen Crowell, his Senate chief of staff, among others, to participate. Gov. John Kasich of Ohio dispatched Kerry Knott, who served as chief of staff to Dick Armey, a former House majority leader, to attend and serve as the point person for transition preparations. Michael Glassner, Donald J. Trump’s national political director, was also planning to attend. Officials for Senator Ted Cruz’s campaign did not respond to repeated requests for comment. Ted Kaufman, a former senator of Delaware, who introduced legislation enacted in 2010 governing presidential transitions and who helped design the 2016 law, said savvy candidates would take the issue seriously. “It was clear to me that you couldn’t wait until Election Day and leave yourself with basically two months to do this — you had to plan way in advance,” he said. “Anybody who is running knows that your first term is when you’re going to get done 90 percent of what you’re going to get done — second terms are to be survived — and the first 100 days is when you are going to accomplish most of it. So you have to be ready.” Correction :  An earlier version of this article misstated the title for Andrew Mayock at the Office of Management and Budget. He is a senior adviser, not the deputy director for management, a post for which he has been nominated but not confirmed. It also misstated the number of records that will be turned over by President Obama. It is 200 terabytes, not 200 million terabytes. Correction :  John Kasich was misidentified as the former governor of Ohio, rather than the current one, in earlier versions of this article. Maggie Haberman and Ashley Parker contributed reporting from New York.  Follow The New York Times’s politics and Washington coverage on Facebook and Twitter , and sign up for the First Draft politics newsletter . A version of this article appears in print on , on Page A 1 of the New York edition with the headline: Post-9/11, Presidential Transitions Start Early . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Related Coverage As Transfer of Power Begins, Obamas Visit White House Nov. 10, 2008 Image Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              