   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Subscribe Log In Image At the Equestrian Center at Morven Park in Virginia. Credit Jane Beiles for The New York Times Jane Smiley’s Horse Country The writer Jane Smiley on what keeps pulling her back to the renowned horse farms of Northern Virginia and Maryland. At the Equestrian Center at Morven Park in Virginia. Credit Jane Beiles for The New York Times Supported by By  Jane Smiley Oct. 16, 2015 I live in Carmel Valley, Calif., where “horse whispering” got started (a revolutionary way to train horses cooperatively). We would say that we are the ultimate horse country, but they would also say that in Louisville, Ky., home of the Kentucky Derby, or Lexington, the center of American thoroughbred breeding. And is there anywhere as simultaneously elegant, beautiful and horsy as Saratoga Springs, N.Y.? There are thriving horsy communities outside Chicago and down in North Carolina, but there is a swath of horse country that loops around Washington, D.C., that has always tempted me, that crosses the boundary between Northern Virginia and Maryland, and routinely includes both — these states are definitely in the same region, and can be one destination, but the landscapes are different, and the cultures are, too. Fall It was 7:30 in the morning. I was driving out of the Salamander Resort & Spa — a winding half-mile through quiet fields that ends two blocks from the Safeway in Middleburg, Va, last year. The day before, I explored the Salamander’s barns, riding rings, herb garden and spa. On this morning the sun floated just above a mist that lay over the grass, pale and billowy, vaporizing upward into the blue sky. I pretended that I saw a fox lurking behind a bush, enjoying the fact that with the drying of the golden grass, his scent was becoming less and less available to any packs of hounds that might be in the neighborhood. I have fox-hunted only once or twice, back in St. Charles County, Mo., when I was 14, but it has always simultaneously fascinated, frightened and repelled me. The animals, the speed and danger, the Englishness, the landscape. I imagine the fox resting under a bush, sneering at the eager hounds and the observant horses. I imagine that the horse knows where he is. The horse’s ears flick, but he says nothing (horses are good talkers, as anyone who has read “Black Beauty” knows perfectly well). Image An early morning rider at Fair Hill Training Center in Maryland. Credit Jane Beiles for The New York Times In this horsy mid-southeast region, there are 15 registered packs of foxhounds between Charlottesville and Leesburg, and six more across the river in Maryland. They still hunt — no ban here, like the English ban of 2004 — maybe because American fox hunters like to chase the fox, but do not insist upon killing it. Back in Carmel Valley, I have four horses. I ride two of them almost every day, and even on bad days, I appreciate their opinions, their beauty, their distinct differences from one another. On good days, I appreciate the four-beat energy of the trot, the waltz-like three-quarter rhythm of the canter, the loose relaxation of a good walk, the reciprocity between horse and human that can be smooth and can be electric. But wherever I am, I appreciate looking at horses, or paintings of horses, or books about horses in bookstores. I noticed that across from the Safeway in Middleburg was the Sporting Gallery, featuring mid-20th-century paintings by Michael Lyne, an English artist who came to the United States in his 30s. The gallery was seductively residential — in each room, I could imagine tables, chairs, rest and relaxation. Lyne’s horses are graceful thoroughbred-types, jumping jumps, galloping across green fields, an ideal sky graced by drifting white clouds forming the backdrop. A watercolor sketch of a woman riding a gray mare who is standing quietly, her ears pricked as if she is listening for the hounds, was irresistible, partly because Lyne painted it in 1949, the year I was born. It is exactly the same age as I am. More was at work here, though — Lyne was the illustrator for a book I loved as a child, “A Second Treasury of Horse Stories,” edited by Margaret Cabell Self. I often sat on the floor of my bedroom, in St. Louis County, poring over the illustrations, fantasizing about my own equine best friend, soon to come? never to come? I had no idea. The Lure of Horse Country 13 Photos View Slide Show  › Image Jane Beiles for The New York Times Almost lunchtime — I was on my way to the Middleburg Classic AA Hunter Show at Morven Park, a famous equestrian estate once owned by Westmoreland Davis, governor of Virginia from 1918 to 1922. The show is solely for “hunters,” horses that gallop calmly and resolutely over any jump they are pointed at (the horses that jump the biggest jumps and go to the Olympics are called “jumpers” — the “hunters” category is different, but some horses do both or start as one and switch to the other). I would guess that these show hunters, sleek and fatter than our California mounts, do not regularly fox hunt during the winter season, because most of them are worth tens of thousands of dollars. But the calm reliability, talent over fences and fitness of field hunters are the ideals that have formed their show careers. The grounds were in a spacious hollow, the rows of trees along the surrounding ridges blocking the view, their leaves shading toward autumnal reds and rusts. The show was a more laid-back affair than shows I’ve been to elsewhere, but it is important; these horses were in contention for various end-of-year championships, which are about prestige, not about big purses. Watching them was soothing — they so clearly knew what they were doing and enjoyed themselves. After leaving Morven Park, I explored some back roads, seductive and narrow, winding and dipping between farms and estates, running through towns with evocative names like Purcellville and Philomont (though I didn’t make it to Stumptown). Here and there a field of corn or a field of soybeans was tucked away; other local crops were vegetables, hay, tobacco, tomatoes, cotton, wheat, peanuts and barley. Once, famous racehorses were bred in Virginia, none more celebrated than Secretariat, winner of the 1973 Triple Crown, who was born at Meadow Farm in Caroline County. Outside of Horse Country, a tack store in Warrenton, stands a gray statue of a horse wearing a blanket. The doors were open, and inside, the ambience was elegant upstairs (chandeliers, dishware, books) and practical downstairs (breeches, boots, rain jackets). The proprietor, Marion Maggiolo, told me when we begin chatting that Rita Mae Brown, author of dozens of novels and mysteries and master of the Oak Ridge Fox Hunt Club, in Afton, began one of her “Sister Jane” fox-hunting mysteries with a corpse astride the mannequin horse outside the entrance. Ms. Maggiolo laughed. She doesn’t need the advertising; Horse Country is a famous tack store, and for good reason, as I discovered when I started trying on breeches downstairs. Ms. Maggiolo has a huge stock geared toward all sorts of styles and body shapes. Riders are picky (I am picky). We want comfort but also not to look too terrible. I chose a pair from the house brand — dark gray and stretchy, “full seat,” which means that the slightly rough padding between the knees extends all the way up and over, giving me just a little more attachment to the saddle. Image The Davis Mansion at Morven Park in Virginia. Credit Jane Beiles for The New York Times I looked at boots, used and new, old style (thick and cylindrical) and new style (supple and tight — one pair looked as if it was made of alligator skin), but I have plenty of boots. I might have lived here. I did work at a camp in Northern Virginia in the summer of 1967, between high school and college. It was hot, but no hotter than St. Louis and a smidgen less humid. If I had been able to talk my mother into letting me go to Sweet Briar, the small women’s college outside of Lynchburg long known for its equestrian and liberal arts programs, instead of Vassar, I might have ended up in Virginia permanently. And then, when I quit teaching at Iowa State in the mid-’90s, and was deciding to leave Iowa, the choice was between Virginia and California. Though there are horses in Iowa, Iowa is not horse country and I had decided to follow that old horsy dream. All winter, I read articles in The Chronicle of the Horse about there being so much snow and ice in Virginia that horses were sliding down the hillsides in their pastures. Twenty-four years in Iowa had given me my fill of snow and ice, and so I chose the Monterey Peninsula, in California, the place where the Pebble Beach equestrian center is only a few miles from the Salinas Rodeo. But still. On my way back to my hotel, I pulled over to look at a farm for sale: stone house, 12 flat acres, decent fencing. Grass. Trees. Rainfall. Temptation flickered. Spring As my husband, Jack, and I drove to the Maryland Grand National, one of three famous timber races (in which the horses jump over solid rail fences) put on each April, what we couldn’t get over were the flowering pear and crab apple trees, the weeping cherries, the magnolias, the startling forsythia, that announce the onset of spring. Maryland horse country is wider and flatter than Virginia horse country, maybe even rainier. Image Ashley Peterson, equestrian manager at Salamander Resort & Spa in Middleburg, Va., walks a horse in the morning mist. Credit Jane Beiles for The New York Times The Maryland Grand National, near Reisterstown, is somewhere in the tradition of the Grand National at Aintree, in England, which was first run in 1839 and is perhaps the most challenging and famous horse race in the world (see “National Velvet”), but the jumps here are lower, 3-foot-6 rather than 5 feet, and the pace is vigorous but not rigorous. It costs $40 to park your car, and if you really want to have the Grand National experience, you must buy your way into the donors’ tent, where food is free, expensive items are being auctioned and women are wearing chapeaus and elegant dresses. Jack and I did not buy our way in, but Jack, former real-estate agent that he is, didn’t hesitate to sneak around the fence. Just before the race, all the suits and dresses and glasses of Champagne moved across the course to the far hillside, which has the best view of the last few jumps and the finish line. The purse for the race was $30,000, not much (the purse for the Grand National at Aintree this year was a million pounds). At Aintree, there were 39 horses in the race. Here there were nine or 10. This modesty is a signal that the Maryland Grand National is a social event for daring amateurs. The field of horses begins the race the way it was done in the old days in England, not out of a starting gate, but walking in a circle as the flag goes up and then comes down. The drumming of their hooves on the course is muffled by a rich, thick carpet of grass. They go far away, come back, do it twice. Someone won, but I couldn’t see who. Our bed-and-breakfast, an hour away in Elkton, Md., was old and imaginative — every room is painted with locally themed murals. The theme of ours was Fair Hill, the local state-run equestrian park that was once a du Pont estate. The ceiling was pale blue, with clouds. Foxes hid in the corners. Above the bathtub, a horse was bucking his rider off as he took a fence. At Fair Hill, eight miles from the B&B, we went first to the Fair Hill International Combined Training event. Combined Training owes its origins to the British cavalry. It has three phases: dressage (where the rider and the horse perform precise movements in a rectangular arena, not unlike ice skating routines); cross country (where the horse and rider gallop over a course of several miles, jumping sometimes very odd jumps, including brush, logs, water, banks and table jumps); and stadium jumping (where the horse and rider jump a tighter course inside a separate, larger arena, to prove that the horse is both sound and controllable after his cross-country adventure). Image Gardens on the grounds at Morven Park. Credit Jane Beiles for The New York Times Combined Training, or “eventing,” is not as popular as horse showing, but it is an Olympic sport and has a passionate and athletic following. Jack and I walked out to the cross-country course down a long wooded path. No leaves on the trees, yet, but cool sunshine through the limber, awakening branches. We passed a few riders, all first level, not quite beginners. Everyone had survived the cross country and was blown-out, a little exhausted. When I first got back into horses in my 40s, eventing was my preferred sport. But it was too much for me. When I passed a friendly woman on a lovely mare, I stopped to congratulate her on her ride. She was alight, thrilled, and, I’ll bet, relieved. Up the hill from the event venue was the Fair Hill Point-to-Point, a day of races not unlike the Maryland Grand National, but with no purses, only trophies. These were jump races for locals and horse people, most of whom know each other. Members of the hunt club also based at Fair Hill were dressed in their formal hunting attire. They accompany the racehorses and their jockeys onto the course and wait for them to finish the race. We sat in the stands, watched the third pony race, and then the leadline race, where two children in jockeys’ silks were led at a trot for about 100 yards. The pony carrying the older child (about 7) was faster, but the dark bay minihorse, maybe 36 inches at the shoulder, was all business, carrying his 4-year-old jockey (who posted beautifully) straight down the course to win by a length. We applauded and laughed and waited for the Heavyweight race, in which the horses must carry 190 pounds (rider, saddle, weights if necessary) over jumps. As at the Maryland Grand National, the horses start in the old way, carry their riders at a brisk but not punishing pace, and jump many timber jumps — all about 3-foot-6. Some of these horses are in their teens and have aged well. They gallop and jump with interest and enthusiasm. I think that this is what racing ought to be, a pleasure and a sport, not a business. No money in it, of course. Image Never Home lives at Delacour Stable on the grounds of Fair Hill Training Center. Credit Jane Beiles for The New York Times The money was across the road, at the Fair Hill Training Center . There are two racetracks in Maryland: Pimlico (where the Preakness is held) and Laurel Park. Most racehorse trainers in the United States keep their horses at the racetrack, but the Fair Hill Training Center was designed to operate on European principles. Trainers are based there, the way French trainers are based at Maisons-Laffitte, 14 miles northwest of Paris, and the horses live there most of the time, going to the tracks only to run in particular races. The training track is a mixture of sand, fiber, rubber and wax, a flat oval; the barns are clustered together. The 2-year-olds and 3-year-olds can get turned out or taken by their riders for a ramble around the countryside. A friend of mine, who came over from Ireland and ended up at Santa Anita, the track in Arcadia, Calif., once worked as an exercise rider here. One of his pleasures was crossing the road and riding in occasional point-to-points on the weekend. To me, this seems like a sane, and maybe relaxed way to treat racehorses, giving them some turn-out time and some countryside and some walks through the woods rather than keeping them in stalls 23 hours a day. The Fair Hill Training Center produces plenty of good runners — the winner of the 2011 Kentucky Derby and the 2013 Dubai World Cup, Animal Kingdom, was trained here by H. Graham Motion. I probably will not move here, Maryland or Virginia, in spite of the lovely roads and houses, the equines grazing in their green pastures behind white rail fences along the roads that dip into valleys and rise over hills, their flowered trees fluttering in a light breeze, as if they were routine rather than eye-popping. Temptation remains, itself a pleasure, but not great enough to overcome the impracticalities. It is true — in Maryland and Virginia horse country, we are halfway to Europe (Ascot and Chantilly for racing, Blenheim Castle for eventing, Dublin for horse showing), though the job of most horses here is not to make a lot of money, just to make use of the countryside, to live long and gallop. Image Horse Country, a tack store in Warrenton, Va. Credit Jane Beiles for The New York Times IF YOU GO The swath of horse country that loops around Washington, D.C., has plenty of venues and attractions to appeal to the experienced rider and nonrider. The region, crossing the boundaries between Northern Virginia and Maryland, can be considered one destination, though you will find their landscapes and cultures are different. Where They Race Horsy Maryland has many places to visit but its three main races are held in the spring — the Maryland Hunt Cup, Maryland Grand National and My Lady’s Manor . The Maryland Steeplechase Association website offers a listing of these races and other attractions. If you’re itching for a horse race, a big one is coming up: the Virginia Gold Cup on Oct. 24. What to See Visit Horse Country Saddlery , the famous tack store in Warrenton, Va. The store offers a huge stock of breeches geared toward all sorts of styles and body shapes; a good selection of boots, used and new, old style and new style; as well as raincoats, jackets, horse tack, gifts and even dishes and chandeliers. The Fair Hill Training Center, on 350 acres of rolling hills in Cecil County, Md., has two racetracks. Where to Stay Check out the Salamander Resort & Spa in Middleburg, Va., and explore its barns, riding rings, herb gardens and spa. Elk Forge Bed and Breakfast in Elkton, Md., is an old and imaginative lodging, where every room is painted with locally themed murals. It is a little more down to earth than the Salamander Resort. Correction :  An article on Oct. 18 about horse farms in Northern Virginia and Maryland misidentified the city in California that is home to the Santa Anita horse racing track. It is Arcadia, not Pasadena. The third volume of Jane Smiley’s Last Hundred Years trilogy, “Golden Age,” will be published Oct. 20.  A version of this article appears in print on , on Page TR 1 of the New York edition with the headline: The Lure of Horse Country . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              