   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index U.S. Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by News Analysis New Party in Charge, Same Challenges Image The House’s defeat of a bill to fund the Department of Homeland Security exposed crippling internal divisions. Credit Win Mcnamee/Getty Images By  Carl Hulse Feb. 27, 2015 WASHINGTON — The tense meltdown in the House on Friday over funding for the Department of Homeland Security underscores how Congress has lost the ability to perform its most basic functions no matter which party is in charge. The outcome — conservative House Republicans initially defeated a stop-gap plan to fund the department for three weeks to prevent a politically risky shutdown of the agency — threatens to quickly tarnish Republican claims to sound management of Congress. The immediate crisis ended late Friday when the House and Senate passed a one-week extension of the security funding, keeping the agency open until lawmakers can revisit the fight next week. But defeat of the initial bill and the way the fight played out diminished hopes for much progress in the months ahead despite the approach of multiple legislative deadlines and crucial issues. Adding to the pessimism was the fact that House Republicans on Friday had to pull back an education bill that also ran into trouble from conservatives, the third piece of legislation this year that House Republicans had to scuttle temporarily because of internal divisions. If Republicans cannot agree among themselves, what are the chances of finding consensus with Democrats? Lawmakers in both parties were mortified that weeks of legislative huffing and puffing over the funding measure had culminated in a collapse in the House over a deal that would quickly put lawmakers back into the same situation in just a few days. “A three-week delay is an embarrassing result and I hope that the House will get its act together moving forward,” said Senator Amy Klobuchar, Democrat of Minnesota, speaking before even the three-week proposal was rejected. “It’s frustrating,” said Representative Mike Simpson, a veteran Republican from Idaho. “Our argument is we can govern.” The current chaos has its roots in a critical decision in December when Speaker John A. Boehner and his fellow House leaders set themselves up to fail by deciding to fund the entire government, except for the Homeland Security Department. Their idea was to fund the agency for only two months and then make funding for it for the rest of the year contingent on approval of provisions that would gut the president’s executive actions on immigration. At the time the deal made sense for both parties. Republican leaders taking unified control of Congress for the first time in eight years were eager to dispose of the budget so they could start the year fresh, and Democrats liked much of the funding that went to federal agencies. In fact, approval of the spending package represented a return to a more orderly appropriations process after years of stop-gap bills, showdowns and budget battles. Lawmakers celebrated and figured they could deal later with the immigration issue, with the most likely outcome that Republicans would have to surrender since they could not be put in the no-win position of shutting down the Homeland Security Department. But House conservatives had other ideas and refused to relent. In January they attached provisions undoing the president’s immigration orders to the budget for the agency. Senator Mitch McConnell, the Kentucky Republican and majority leader, then set out to show them the futility of pushing the House bill by forcing the Senate to vote four times on a motion to open debate on the measure only to run into four consecutive Democratic filibusters. Conservative opponents of the immigration policy were still not mollified. On Friday, they seemed willing to let funding for the agency lapse to demonstrate their refusal to go along with the president and, as Representative Walter B. Jones of North Carolina said after the vote, to “show that the Constitution still matters.” Republicans who had hoped to take part in a more productive Congress acknowledged that short-term funding bills were probably not what the founders had in mind. “I don’t think we should govern in jump starts and kick starts, I’ve said that all along,” said Cory Gardner, the new Republican senator from Colorado. Democrats could hardly restrain their glee as they watched Republicans struggle with a relatively minor stop-gap measure, given the major issues to come. “They not only can’t govern, they can’t count,” said Representative Steve Israel of New York, a member of the Democratic leadership, after Republicans miscalculated support for the three-week spending bill in the House. But the dysfunction also worried lawmakers from both parties who want to make some bipartisan deals on issues like taxes. “My hope is that this does not define the session,” said Senator Ron Wyden of Oregon, the top Democrat on the Finance Committee. “We have to find some common ground.” But the sharp divisions and lack of trust between congressional Republicans and President Obama and his Democratic allies have caused a notable decline in the ability of Congress to operate. Lawmakers spend much of their time addressing deadlines and unfinished business pushed off from earlier fights — a process Mr. Obama described this week as the “habits of manufactured crises and self-inflicted wounds.” Republicans acknowledge they will be judged on their effectiveness after years of ridiculing Democrats about the state of the Senate and entering the year with swagger and confidence that they could surely do better. “All I can say is, do we deliver at the end of the day, did we get through this mess?” said Senator Lindsey Graham, Republican of South Carolina. “Did we get the D.H.S. department funded? Do we do the appropriation bills? Do we pass a budget? If we can do all these things, we’ll have an accomplishment to show.” And if they don’t, they will be judged accordingly. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page A 11 of the New York edition with the headline: New Party in Charge, Same Challenges . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Related Coverage House Passes One-Week Funding Extension for Homeland Security Feb. 27, 2015 Image Funding Fight Over Homeland Security Poses Dangers for the G.O.P. Feb. 23, 2015 Image Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              