   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Opinion Supported by Op-Ed Contributor How the G.O.P. Tax Bill Will Ruin Obamacare By  J. B. Silvers Dec. 4, 2017 Image A woman considering enrollment in the Affordable Care Act in Miami in November. Credit Joe Raedle/Getty Images As part of their giant tax bill, Republicans in Congress are about to eliminate the Affordable Care Act’s individual mandate. Their objective is not sensible health care reform but rather insensible arithmetic that could satisfy the byzantine rules governing the Senate’s reconciliation process. The purpose of the mandate is to evenly distribute risk among healthy and unhealthy Americans on the individual insurance market so that costs are shared and no one is left out. Will killing the mandate ruin Obamacare exchanges? No, but it will transform them into an extended form of Medicaid by another name. Americans with subsidized policies will stay in the system, with help from the federal government. Unsubsidized individuals, however, will be driven out of the market, because a repeal of the mandate will cause premiums on exchange plans to skyrocket as healthy people exit. Many of these people will purchase new stripped-down, less expensive policies — courtesy of a Trump administration executive order — with the understanding that they can sign up for a more robust exchange policy at the next open enrollment period if they need full coverage in times of illness. About three-quarters of those who buy insurance on the exchanges are subsidized by the federal government to reduce premiums to a specified “affordable” percentage of their income. The loss of the mandate will not affect them. But many healthy, younger enrollees — who help to make insurance affordable by balancing the risk of sicker older people — will be driven away by higher premiums, and without the mandate, they would probably opt out — they typically didn’t want to buy insurance anyway. Unfortunately, their exit will leave a higher average cost for those who are left. Within a year or two of elimination of the mandate, the individual insurance market will resemble the failed pre-Obamacare days when pre-existing conditions and high premiums made access impossible. The difference is that the government will foot a large part of the cost through subsidies. Before the A.C.A., lower-income people who didn’t qualify for Medicaid were priced out of the individual market, but with subsidies, they can now purchase lower-cost plans. If the individual mandate is eliminated, it will be middle-income people without subsidies who lose access. The continuing high enrollment this fall supports the idea that most people still see the subsidized insurance offerings on the exchanges as a good deal. As a result, the demand side of this unusual market will stay strong for the subsidized customers. How will the insurance companies react? They will see high demand for subsidized insurance as a tempting market in spite of past and future chaos. The problem for them is that these customers are sicker and less predictable in their needs, which makes it difficult to set a price. This is precisely why the number of insurers this year has dropped so severely. But managing uncertainty is at the core of this business. Any risk is acceptable if the compensation is high enough. Many observers have been critical that only one or two Obamacare insurers offer plans in many counties. But for the remaining insurers, there is a silver lining: monopoly. Without serious competition and with the support of subsidies, insurers can set premiums high enough to cover any contingency and virtually guarantee a good profit. The high quoted premiums on the exchanges signal that insurers are anticipating these changes in the pool. The remaining insurers will not run away. In fact, I expect those who stay will report record profits next year, even without the mandate. By now all those firms with a low tolerance for risk have exited. However, the timing of a mandate repeal is central. Eliminating the individual mandate will make little difference to insurers in 2018 if the mandate expires in 2019. But Congress may decide to eliminate the individual mandate immediately. Then insurers, who priced their plans assuming continuation of the same historical enrollee pool, will lose their shirts as healthier enrollees drop out. Changing the rules halfway through the game is not something insurance company C.E.O.s. can anticipate, but it is their biggest challenge now. A surprising result of eliminating the individual mandate would be an effective expansion of a plan that many Republicans in Congress would like to cut or abolish: Medicaid. Under the evolving Obamacare policies, lower-income enrollees are heavily subsidized by the government, and the plans on the exchanges are largely offered by insurers specialized in Medicaid service to the states. Without the individual mandate, the exchanges will not die but will continue as zombies offering high-cost coverage, fed by the federal government and stumbling around the health system failing to serve their original purpose — access for all regardless of age, health status or pre-existing conditions. Yet as long as the subsidies continue, health plans will offer their policies on the exchanges with very high premiums. While this may allow access for some who otherwise would be left out, the grand purpose of the A.C.A. — to allow affordable care for all — will slip away. Is this any way to do health policy? J. B. Silvers is a professor of health care finance at the Weatherhead School of Management at Case Western Reserve University.  Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter (@NYTopinion) , and sign up for the Opinion Today newsletter . Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              