   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Special Section: Wealth A Book, Four Funds and a Flood of Cash Image Joel Greenblatt wrote the “The Little Book That Beats the Market.” Four new mutual funds, started by his Gotham Asset Management, use variations of the book’s approach. Credit Brendan McDermid/Reuters By  Randall Smith Oct. 22, 2014 Joel Greenblatt had been a successful investor for two decades before his best-selling “The Little Book That Beats the Market” was published in 2005. But the hedge fund niche he first pursued — “special situations” like spinoffs and other corporate restructurings — was modest in scale, and the most he had managed directly for outside investors was $500 million. “The Little Book” offered what Mr. Greenblatt described jokingly as a “magic formula” to pick stocks based on two numerical “value” metrics that, he said, produced returns that beat the market on paper by more than 10 percentage points annually from 1988 to 2004. When readers clamored for ways to follow the “magic formula” strategy in real life, he developed a website that generated stock picks that also topped the market. But individuals who tried them actually trailed the market by mistiming their purchases and sales. And when he introduced four conventional mutual funds pursuing the strategy starting in 2010, they raised only $360 million. But now Mr. Greenblatt, 56, is suddenly being showered with money from Wall Street. Four new mutual funds, started by his Gotham Asset Management using variations of the book’s computerized approach, have mushroomed to $4.8 billion in assets from $1 billion in January. The Gotham funds are part of the hot new category of “liquid alternatives,” hedge funds in mutual fund form, where Gotham this year ranks No. 1 among fund sponsors in new-money inflows, according to Morningstar. In all, Gotham, which also manages traditional hedge funds for institutions and wealthy investors, has taken in $8 billion since reopening to outside investors in 2009. Gotham has grown in part by courting Wall Street banks and brokerage firms including JPMorgan Chase and Bank of America Merrill Lynch, gaining access to their wealth management platforms for individual investors. He has appeared about twice a month before groups of brokers and wealth advisers. At a meeting on Oct. 1, with 10 brokers in a cramped conference room in his Madison Avenue office and 40 more listeners on the phone, a tanned and confident Mr. Greenblatt told them, “We buy the cheapest we can find and short the most expensive.” With copies of his book stacked behind him, he said the general methodology had been “back-tested back to 1990” and “has worked for 30 to 40 years, no question.” Mr. Greenblatt, the son of a shoe company executive, grew up in the affluent suburb of Great Neck, N.Y. For his M.B.A. project at the University of Pennsylvania, he and two classmates hand-tested the value-investing system codified by Benjamin Graham in the 1930s by using stocks beginning with the letters A and B. The results, titled “ How the Small Investor Can Beat the Market ,” were published in 1981 in The Journal of Portfolio Management. He founded his own firm, Gotham Capital, when he was 27. It specialized in picking a handful of stocks in companies undergoing restructurings. In his first book in 1997, “You Can Be a Stock Market Genius,” Mr. Greenblatt said he gained 50 percent a year before fees from 1985 to 1994, just before he returned all outside investors’ capital. While his funds were closed to outside investors from 1995 to 2009, Mr. Greenblatt devoted time to raising five children, began teaching a value-investing course at Columbia Business School and became a prominent backer of charter schools in New York City. In 2003, with his partner Robert Goldstein at Gotham, he started what became a $35 million research effort that first produced “The Little Book” and later the current fund series. “The idea of the project was: Could we prove what I had been teaching students and we had been using ourselves actually works on a broader scale?” Mr. Greenblatt said. The stock-picking formula in the “Little Book,” which sold 300,000 copies and led to more than 30 other “Little Book” titles by the same publisher (“The Little Book of Currency Trading,” “The Little Book of Big Dividends”), relied on statistical measurements of companies’ pretax, pre-interest earnings yield and return on capital. Four years later, Mr. Greenblatt decided to reopen his doors and take outside money again under an updated system that aims to customize the results of value screens similar to the “magic formula.” Every quarter, 13 Gotham analysts feed 2,000 companies’ earnings reports into a database, making adjustments for factors like pension obligations and legal claims. Gotham then picks stocks from the top 20 percent of the field and shorts stocks from the bottom. Turnover is high, up to 399 percent a year, a possible pitfall. As of the funds’ last reports in July, the largest holdings included Gilead Sciences, a California biotech company, and Delta Air Lines. Its shorts were led by Medidata Solutions, a health care software provider, and Salix Pharmaceuticals. But Mr. Greenblatt notes that the screens do not exclude prominent stocks like Apple and Google, which he said on CNBC in mid-2013 were cash-generating “bargains hiding in plain sight.” The liquid alternatives market, which includes hedge funds, managed futures and other exotic offerings, has mushroomed to $161 billion from $38 billion in 2008, by Morningstar’s count. Facing customer demands for low-fee index funds, Wall Street has been selling “liquid alts” as a lower-volatility alternative to traditional stock and bond funds at a time when both markets are considered richly priced. But the Gotham funds, like other alternatives, come with risks and high fees. The largest, the $2.8 billion Gotham Absolute Return Fund, which was started in August 2012, owns stocks equal to 120 percent of its assets and has “short” bets on price declines in stocks equal to 60 percent of assets. While the offsetting longs and shorts leave a net market exposure of about 60 percent of assets, the combined value of the positions, at 180 percent of assets, means more that could go wrong. Another fund, the $1.2 billion Gotham Enhanced Return Fund, started in May 2013, has even more exposure, holding long positions of 170 percent of assets and shorts at 70 percent, for a total exposure of 240 percent. While the funds’ returns have ranked high in their categories, a Morningstar analyst, A. J. D’Asaro, called the Enhanced Return fund “one of the riskier” in its category. The Gotham mutual funds have fees and expenses of up to 2.25 percent, almost double the industry average for all mutual funds, which Mr. D’Asaro called “a significant ongoing hurdle to performance.” Mr. Greenblatt said the fees were lower than those of many traditional hedge funds. But when combined with an additional fee that can reach 1 percent or more for Wall Street managed accounts, the resulting total fees, topping 3 percent annually, take a big bite out of investors’ returns. “I would be hard pressed to recommend that any investor incur those kind of costs,” said Hersh Shefrin, a behavioral finance professor at Santa Clara University, who says most individuals should rely instead on a diversified set of stock and bond index funds, which carry fees one-tenth of Gotham’s. He said he thought Mr. Greenblatt was trading on “the book’s credibility to induce investors to fork over that amount.” Don Garman, chief investment officer at Mirador Capital Partners in Pleasanton, Calif., which manages $200 million, compared investing books that claim to beat the market with diet and golf instructional books. “It’s fool’s gold, like ‘Dogs of the Dow,’ which worked for a while and other kinds of quick, breezy, digestible formulas. He has got just enough of a name to get people to send him money.” To see what might go wrong, investors need look no further than the fund that led the liquid-alts league until recently. The $16 billion MainStay Marketfield Fund protected investors during the 2008 market downturn, losing just 13 percent when the market fell 37 percent, but also beating the market during the 26 percent rebound of 2009. “They killed it on downside protection and then knocked it out of the park,” said Josh Charney, an alternatives analyst at Morningstar. MainStay led the league among liquid-alts sponsors with $13.4 billion in inflows in 2013, Morningstar said. But the tide has turned this year for MainStay Marketfield, which through September has lost 9 percent while the market rose 8.3 percent and its category gained 1.5 percent. “They absolutely had horrendous performance on a lot of different bets,” Mr. Charney said. As a result, the fund has seen outflows of $1.5 billion this year. As for Mr. Greenblatt of Gotham, “Joel does a great job articulating their strategy and how they got to where they are today from where they started; the book was their ideological launching pad,” said Brian Pearson, chief investment officer of Auxano Advisors in Bellevue, Wash., which manages $350 million and began allocating client assets to the Gotham funds this year. But Mr. Pearson acknowledged the risk that some alternative funds could “blow up” in extreme circumstances. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page F 3 of the New York edition with the headline: A Book, Four Funds and a Flood of Cash . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Related Coverage Stock Buybacks Demystified Oct. 22, 2014 Making Sure Retirement Savings Don’t Run Out Oct. 22, 2014 Image Wealth Special Section Image Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              