   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Briefing Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Europe Edition Adele, Syria, Hamburg: Your Monday Briefing By  Patrick Boehler Feb. 12, 2017 Good morning. Here’s what you need to know: Image Credit Al Drago/The New York Times • These are chaotic days inside the U.S. National Security Council: The council’s leader, Michael T. Flynn, is facing an inquiry into his communications with Russia . And staff members are struggling to make policy to fit President Trump’s Twitter posts. Mr. Trump reacted with surprising restraint to a North Korean ballistic missile test, appearing intent on showing that he would not be baited into a confrontation as he spent a weekend of golf diplomacy with Prime Minister Shinzo Abe of Japan. The president’s foreign-policy positions are proving less radical than forecast on China and other countries. He meets with Prime Minister Justin Trudeau of Canada today and Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu of Israel on Wednesday. _____ Image Credit Alyssa Schukar for The New York Times • The whiplash legal drama over Mr. Trump’s immigration actions is likely to continue. Mr. Trump said he might sign “ a brand-new order ” today to replace a targeted immigration ban a judicial panel refused to reinstate . Here’s a look at his options . For now, refugees and travelers from seven predominantly Muslim countries can continue to enter the U.S., but undocumented immigrants are bracing for a surge in deportations . Some are fleeing to Canada . Here is a step-by-step tracker of Mr. Trump’s cabinet and agenda . _____ Image Credit Evgeniy Maloletka/Associated Press • Mr. Trump ’s lack of a clear position on the conflict in Ukraine has bewildered the residents of Avdiivka , the town at the epicenter of the latest round of fighting, and officials on both sides of the war. Federica Mogherini, the European Union’s foreign minister, said she found disagreement on migration , climate change and the Israeli-Palestinian conflict in her first talks with the Trump administration. _____ Image Credit Filip Singer/European Pressphoto Agency • Frank-Walter Steinmeier , Germany’s longtime foreign minister, has been chosen by an assembly of lawmakers as the country’s next president, a largely ceremonial role. His party, the Social Democrats, has surged in polls after making Martin Schulz, the former president of the European Parliament, its candidate to challenge Chancellor Angela Merkel in elections in the fall. _____ Image Credit Lucy Nicholson/Reuters • Women dominated this year’s Grammy Awards . Adele swept major awards. Beyoncé delivered a showstopper celebrating motherhood. And A Tribe Called Quest gave a powerfully anti-Trump performance. The musical world is mourning Al Jarreau , a supple vocalist who sold millions of records and won Grammys for his work in jazz, pop and R&B. He died at 76. _____ Business Image Credit Peter DaSilva for The New York Times • Women in their 60s and 70s have become more likely to stay on the job at an older age , many out of enjoyment as much as obligation. • Gary Cohn , a longtime Goldman Sachs executive, has become President Trump’s go-to figure on matters related to jobs, business and growth. • Amazon is trying to reimagine bricks-and-mortar sales with unconventional experiments in its hometown, Seattle . • 360-degree videos  have become an increasingly popular way for tourism boards to entice clients. • OPEC will release its first monthly oil output numbers since producers agreed to cuts in December. • Here’s a snapshot of global markets . In the News Image Credit Gianni Cipriano for The New York Times • An Italian magistrate separates children from mafia families to interrupt a generational cycle of criminality. “The state can’t allow that children are educated to be criminals,” he said. [ The New York Times ] • In Syria, Russian forces bombed an Aleppo hospital multiple times using incendiary munitions and cluster bombs, a new report suggests, despite the Kremlin’s denials. [ The New York Times ] • Voters in Switzerland approved a measure to ease the citizenship process for third-generation immigrants but rejected a government plan to overhaul the country’s corporate tax system. [ Reuters ] • In Romania, an estimated 70,000 demonstrators gathered in Bucharest yesterday, determined to show that the crisis over the government’s plans to decriminalize some forms of graft wasn’t over. [ The New York Times ] • Pablo Iglesias, the head of Spain’s far-left party Podemos, defeated a challenge in a leadership vote, giving him a mandate to stick with his radical line. [ The New York Times ] • The Palestinian Authority denounced an Israeli bill that would, if approved by lawmakers, effectively ban mosques from using loudspeakers in nightly calls to prayer. [ Times of Israel ] • In Greece ’s biggest peacetime evacuation ever, about 72,000 people left their homes in Thessaloniki so that a World War II bomb could be defused. [ The New York Times ] • Hamburg’s airport was evacuated when a corrosive substance leaked through its air conditioning system. The authorities have since ruled out an attack. [ Reuters ] Smarter Living Image Credit Oliver Munday • We’re in Week 3 of our New Year’s resolution month, when we’re helping you stick to your goals. There’s still time to participate if you haven’t joined already. Sticking to your resolution can be a lot easier with a support system to keep you headed in the right direction. Some ideas that may help: Pursue a financial tuneup with the help of a detailed checklist ; turn your Instagram feed into a visual, social support group to stick to your diet ; or even use wearable devices that deliver shocks to keep you from reverting to old habits. We’d love to hear what support systems work for you in keeping your resolutions. Email us , and on Thursday we’ll share some of our favorites. • Recipe of the day: If you’re the type who plans for Valentine’s Day, chicken confit is the one you need. Noteworthy Image Credit Wael Hamzeh/European Pressphoto Agency • Valentine’s Day is tomorrow. Romantics can check out our latest Modern Love podcast or revisit one of the column’s most popular entries: The 36 Questions That Lead to Love . • “La La Land”  has scooped up five Baftas as it marches toward a likely victory at the Oscars later this month. • Hanne Gaby Odiele , the Belgian model, has become an intersex advocate . That decision seems only to have increased her success in the fashion world. • And here’s how to tell a ghost story : Start with atmosphere and don’t worry about an ending . Back Story Image Credit Nick Perry/Associated Press Mail delivery has always been a headache in the archipelago kingdom of Tonga, where some addresses are no more than a village and island name. “Undelivered mail piles up,” said Siosifa Pomana, the head of Tonga Post. “We often have to rely just on the description: In this village, on the left, there is a mango tree and on the right there’s a guy with two dogs,” he said. “It’s very difficult.” But this week, he’s beginning to unroll a new address system that will pinpoint residents across the country’s 36 inhabited islands. The system, developed by a London-based start-up, is called what3words . It divides the entire planet into 3 meter by 3 meter squares, identifying each with a unique string of words. For the New York Times office in Manhattan, it’s “zest.ropes.along.” For the Tonga Post headquarters, it’s “international.bashfully.placidity.” That’s in English — users can also find three-word identifiers in French, Spanish, Portuguese, Swahili, Russian, German and more. Mongolia , Ivory Coast and St. Maarten have signed on. The Red Cross uses it in the Philippines for disaster relief . One consequence in Tonga, Mr. Pomana said, will be more postal work: “This is going to spike up our inbound mail.” _____ Your Morning Briefing is published weekday mornings. Read the latest edition of the U.S. briefing here and the latest for Asia and Australia here . What would you like to see here? Contact us at europebriefing@nytimes.com . Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              