   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by In Debt Dodd-Frank’s Hotel California May Have Exit After All By  Stephen J. Lubben April 16, 2015 General Electric may be the first to find out if it is possible to escape the Hotel California. In G.E.’s case, the reference refers to the company’s designation as a “systemically important financial institution” under the Dodd-Frank financial overhaul law. The label for companies deemed too big to fail subjects them to heightened regulation, some fear forever. G.E.’s recent move to shed large pieces of its finance operations will put that provision to the test . G.E.’s determination to not only check out but leave has focused scrutiny on a Dodd-Frank provision that some view as even stickier. Dodd-Frank section 117 provides that large bank holding companies that participated in the government’s Troubled Asset Relief Program during the financial crisis are subject to greater regulation, just as if they had been designated as systemically important by the Financial Stability Oversight Council, regardless of any action by the council. Furthermore, the provision also states that these companies shall continue to be treated as if they had been designated, even after they cease to be bank holding companies. The provision was no doubt intended for Goldman Sachs and Morgan Stanley. The two investment banks became bank holding companies during the financial crisis, giving them access to the Federal Reserve’s discount window and giving the market some reassurance that they would not follow Lehman Brothers into bankruptcy. After the crisis, there would have been a natural temptation to drop the bank holding company status and Fed regulation. But Dodd-Frank changed all that. Calling section 117(b) the Hotel California provision did tend to make it sound as if too-big-to-fail status was something a company could never shake . But the law has always provided a mechanism to challenge the automatic treatment of financial institutions as systemically important. This is as it should be, because the big banks should have incentives to become smaller or less complex, and the desire for less regulation could do that. That said, the Financial Stability Oversight Council clearly has to guard against manipulation and make sure that changes to a financial institution are not just cosmetic. And a bank cannot be able to fluctuate its size and complexity to avoid regulation whenever it’s convenient. In short, the Hotel California moniker, although catchy, was perhaps a little too alarmist. Perhaps it should be the Happy House rule instead? Stephen J. Lubben is the Harvey Washington Wiley Chair in corporate governance and business ethics at Seton Hall Law School and an expert on bankruptcy.  Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              