   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Business Day Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Blue Bell Is Shipping Ice Cream Again After a Listeria Outbreak Image Blue Bell ice cream on a store shelf before the listeria outbreak that forced the shutdown of all four of the company&apos;s plants. Credit Orlin Wagner/Associated Press By  Rachel Abrams Aug. 12, 2015 Back in April, employees at H-E-B’s grocery stores were scrambling to pull Blue Bell ice cream from their shelves. Come September, they may be rushing to put it back. Blue Bell Creameries began shipping ice cream from its facility in Sylacauga, Ala., on Tuesday, more than three months after an outbreak of listeria contamination nearly devastated the Southwestern ice cream favorite and forced the closing of all four of its plants. But while this week’s move put frozen treats one step closer to consumers, the company said it did not yet know which stores would ultimately restock their shelves with Blue Bell flavors, or how soon. “We’ve still got to meet with our retailers,” said Joe Robertson, Blue Bell’s advertising and public relations manager. “Retailers have been very supportive of us.” Three people died and several others became ill after eating Blue Bell ice cream products contaminated with the listeria bacteria. A series of recalls and cleanups at the plants failed to eradicate the problem, and in April, the company voluntarily pulled all of its ice cream from store shelves. The move plunged the 108-year-old brand into the biggest crisis in its history. Fourteen hundred of its 3,900 employees were laid off, and 1,400 more were put on partly paid furlough. In July, Blue Bell got a lifeline from the Texas investor Sid Bass, who made an undisclosed investment. The Alabama plant is the only one of the company’s plants — two others are in Texas and one is in Oklahoma — that has been reopened and is producing the company’s products. Before the shutdown, the Alabama plant accounted for about 20 percent of Blue Bell’s items, Mr. Robertson said. Blue Bell must notify the Texas Department of State Health Services two weeks before it resumes production, according to Chris Van Deusen, a spokesman for the agency. Mr. Robertson said that the company had hired microbiologists to help review its safety procedures, and that every batch of ice cream would be tested before shipment. State officials in Alabama began collecting their own samples in late July, and cleared Blue Bell on Aug. 4, said Ron Dawsey of the Alabama Department of Public Health. About 200 employees are currently running the Alabama factory, and 42 more are set to return from furlough. “We’re bringing back furloughed employees every week,” Mr. Robertson said, adding that a dozen employees would return on Monday. Employees of H-E-B , with 300 locations in southern Texas, were on the phone with Blue Bell on Wednesday to figure out how soon the grocery chain could resume selling ice cream, according to a spokeswoman, Dya Campos. H-E-B hopes to start restocking its Houston stores in early or mid-September, Ms. Campos said, and slowly stock other locations. Representatives of the supermarket chains Kroger and Publix said they hoped to sell Blue Bell ice cream once again, pending assurances that the products were safe. Blue Bell trucks carrying products from the Alabama plant were on their way to some of the company’s 50 distribution centers. From there, Blue Bell’s drivers, many of whom have been on partly paid furlough since May, will head out to individual retailers and personally restock the shelves themselves. But the company may still have an uphill battle to win over consumers, many of whom have already decided on their ice cream preferences deep into a hot and humid August. Blue Bell is the country’s fifth-largest ice cream maker, behind companies including Unilever, Nestlé and General Mills, according to data from Euromonitor. “To get people to switch back, you have to do something,” said Phil Lempert, a food industry analyst. “You can’t just show up on the shelves and expect all of your customers to come back.” He added that the company may have to offer discounts or other promotions. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page B 3 of the New York edition with the headline: Blue Bell Is Shipping Ice Cream Again After a Listeria Outbreak . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Related Coverage Blue Bell Knew About Listeria Issues, F.D.A. Says May 7, 2015 Image For Blue Bell, a Drastic Move to Recall Ice Cream as Listeria Findings Rose April 21, 2015 Image video Blue Bell C.E.O. Apologizes for Recall April 21, 2015 Image Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              