   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Morning Agenda: Blackstone’s Infrastructure Bet Image Mohammed bin Salman, the deputy crown prince of Saudi Arabia and chairman of the kingdom’s largest sovereign wealth fund. Credit Fayez Nureldine/Agence France-Presse — Getty Images By  Amie Tsang May 26, 2017 “I think we have an opportunity to establish overnight a leadership position,” Hamilton E. James, president of Blackstone, said of the $20 billion cornerstone investment by Saudi Arabia’s sovereign wealth fund in his firm’s infrastructure fund. Blackstone plans to double the size of the investment vehicle, and its establishment comes after promises of a $1 trillion infrastructure initiative by the Trump administration — which would come from government partnerships with the private sector. Blackstone is steaming ahead with plans. It has already begun marketing to other firms . But will it be as smooth a process as Mr. James describes? There are plenty of factors to consider: • The field is likely to be crowded — infrastructure investing looks attractive to several players, with stock and bond markets richly valued. • There could be political hurdles. There are no guarantees that the Trump administration will be able to unleash its waves of spending. • Investment projects tend to take longer than the corporate buyouts and real estate deals that private equity firms are often involved in. • And it could be tricky navigating deals with such a large and influential partner as Saudi Arabia. So considering all that, are investors getting prematurely excited? Blackstone’s stock got a lift after the deal was announced, but the enthusiasm is overdone, if you examine the numbers, Richard Beales writes in Breakingviews . Trump Administration Reviews Responsibility for Student Loans A policy shop with a trillion-dollar bank on the side — that is how the United States Education Department has been described. The department, which manages more in assets than most banks, is having its responsibility for those funds reviewed by the Trump administration. James Runcie, the head of the department’s federal student aid program, resigned on Tuesday, and he revealed the potential change in his resignation memo. The switch would give responsibility for the student loan program to the Treasury Department . It is an idea that has had supporters over the years, who argue that such a move would simplify the process of applying for federal student aid and repaying loans. But others worry about handing control to a department that is focused on paying for government, rather than on increasing educational opportunities. The Treasury has also run a pilot project to collect on defaulted loans, a job which the Education Department contracts out. The experiment did not end well, failing to increase collection rates or help borrowers better understand their repayment options. G.M. Accused of Emissions Deceit Another day, another lawsuit over emissions cheating. A Seattle law firm that specializes in suing automakers has filed a class-action lawsuit against General Motors , accusing it of programming some of its heavy-duty pickup trucks to cheat on diesel emissions tests. This comes just days after the United States filed a lawsuit against Fiat Chrysler Automobiles accusing it of using software to cheat on emissions tests, and after German prosecutors searched the offices of Daimler , the maker of Mercedes cars, as part of an investigation into whether the company improperly evaded emissions rules. It is unclear whether environmental regulators will open investigations into G.M. and its emissions-control technology. G.M. denied the allegations: “These claims are baseless and we will vigorously defend ourselves.” Quotation of the Day “Historically speaking, and as a seasoned investor, I’d say investors should just ignore geopolitical events like ‘Brexit’ or whatever is happening in Brazil.” James B. Stack, president of InvesTech Research and Stack Financial Management. Unexpected events may create volatility in markets, but they often do not have a lasting impact . Follow Amie Tsang on Twitter @amietsang .  Related Coverage G.M. Accused in Lawsuit of Deceit on Diesel Truck Emissions May 25, 2017 Image Buy? Sell? Politics May Move the Market, but Rarely for Long May 25, 2017 Image Trump Administration Considers Moving Student Loans from Education Department to Treasury May 25, 2017 Image Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              