   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Opinion Supported by Letters Pencils, Books … and Full Internet Access Aug. 24, 2016 Image Local kids come to the West Farms Library in the Bronx to access free Wi-Fi. Credit Jonathan Blanc/The New York Public Library To the Editor: Re “ Too Poor to Afford the Internet ” (Op-Ed, Aug. 12): There was a time, not that long ago, when paper and pencil were all that homework required. But as Anthony W. Marx notes, that time has passed. In urban areas, rural areas and everywhere in between, students who lack internet service at home have difficulty doing their nightly schoolwork. Many of them cobble together whatever connectivity they can, picking up free Wi-Fi signals in front of libraries, in school parking lots, and at fast-food restaurants. Credit them with creativity and resilience. But getting homework done should not be this hard. Solving this problem will take a mix of initiatives. Already the Federal Communications Commission has updated its program supporting connectivity in low-income households to include broadband. Many broadband providers have low-cost offerings, and we need to ensure that schools and students are aware of them. We also need federal policies to increase unlicensed spectrum, which is used to support Wi-Fi. Finally, we need to keep tabs on local efforts — from outfitting school buses with wireless service to lending out library hot spots — and make sure that successful programs are copied elsewhere. JESSICA ROSENWORCEL Washington The writer is a commissioner of the Federal Communications Commission, appointed by President Obama. To the Editor: Internet access has become almost as essential as the air we breathe and the water we drink. We all need it in this modern age, and bravo to public libraries, which lead the way in offering it. It is time to find a way to make access free to all by expanding services at our public libraries and by creatively turning other venues into Wi-Fi meccas. There should also be programs that bring it into the homes of people who need financial help with it. JENNIFER DORN New York To the Editor: The internet is the 21st century’s marketplace, politically and economically; it’s where the next generation will do business and exchange ideas. That’s why it’s critical that Congress resist partisan efforts to gut the Federal Communications Commission’s recent action modernizing its Lifeline program to support broadband. For more than 30 years, the Lifeline program has enjoyed bipartisan support and helped low-income households buy telephone service. Beginning in December, barring hostile actions from Congress, qualifying households will be able to use their Lifeline dollars to offset the cost of broadband. Our children deserve access to this century’s public square. MICHAEL COPPS Washington The writer, a former commissioner of the Federal Communications Commission appointed by President George W. Bush, is a special adviser to Common Cause. To the Editor: While traveling in Britain this month, I was impressed with the availability of public Wi-Fi. Throughout London and at tourist attractions elsewhere, Wi-Fi connections are readily available at no cost (most with no password required). They seem to be corporate sponsored. A lesson for our local companies perhaps? RICHARD B. CRYSTAL Pikesville, Md. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page A 18 of the New York edition with the headline: Pencils, Books … and Full Internet Access . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              