   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Economy Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by G.O.P. Split Over Congressional Budget Office Head Image Republicans are vigorously debating whether to reappoint Douglas Elmendorf as director of the Congressional Budget Office. Credit Alex Wong/Getty Images By  Jonathan Weisman Dec. 1, 2014 WASHINGTON — Douglas W. Elmendorf is an obscure figure beyond a narrow radius around Capitol Hill. As the director of the Congressional Budget Office , his nuts-and-bolts job is to serve as the official scorekeeper on the price of legislation and the referee on the budgetary and economic impacts of policy, from the Affordable Care Act to an increase in the minimum wage. So it is one of the stranger surprises of the midterm election fallout that the question of whether to reappoint him to his post has become a hot topic of debate — among Republicans. “Doug Elmendorf has been so exceptional, he seems to be trying as hard as possible to give a fair, unbiased review of academic literature on all these issues,” said Michael R. Strain, deputy director of economic policy studies at the conservative American Enterprise Institute, who called for Mr. Elmendorf’s reappointment in National Review . “That sometimes has greatly frustrated the administration and sometimes helped the administration. It sometimes has greatly frustrated Republicans and sometimes helped Republicans.” Not so, say the most ardent conservatives, who want Mr. Elmendorf, a former Federal Reserve economist, replaced as soon as his term ends on Jan. 3. Grover G. Norquist, the small-government, low-tax activist at Americans for Tax Reform, has prominently laid out an indictment that includes putting a supposedly inaccurate price tag on the Affordable Care Act and Mr. Elmendorf’s “failed Keynesian economic analysis.” Dan Holler, a spokesman for Heritage Action, the political arm of the Heritage Foundation, agreed. “It would be absurd for a Republican-controlled Congress to keep Elmendorf at the helm of the C.B.O.” he said. “For a party looking to change the culture in Washington, this would be a good place to start.” The budget office wields enormous power in its proclamations over legislative cost and effect; working the referee has been time-honored since the office’s creation in 1974. But the hand-wringing over the changing of director has almost always been partisan, not intraparty. In 1981, officials in the Reagan administration wanted to oust the C.B.O.’s founding director, Alice M. Rivlin, when they took over Washington, but they were thwarted by senior Republicans in Congress who said that was a Hill prerogative. Republicans lamented the fate of the budget office when Democrats picked Peter R. Orszag, whom they viewed as the Democratic Party’s go-to economist. Democrats were aghast when Republicans picked Douglas Holtz-Eakin to move from President George W. Bush’s Council of Economic Advisers to the director’s office. The decision rests in the hands of Republican leaders, including the new chairmen of the House and Senate budget committees as well as the House Ways and Means and Senate Finance committees. Representative Tom Price, a Georgia Republican and a strong conservative, will be writing the House’s budget next year, while Representative Paul D. Ryan of Wisconsin moves to the Ways and Means Committee, which originates tax bills and has the dominant role in health care legislation. Both men argue that the budget office should use more “dynamic scoring” when assessing the cost of tax cuts, saying the impact on the Treasury would be mitigated greatly by the additional economic growth they contend the cuts would engender. Such a change in scorekeeping, based on the supply side theory popular among conservatives, would ease the push to overhaul the tax code and produce an ostensibly balanced budget while lowering top individual and corporate tax rates. That has Democrats worried. “If they’re bringing in a C.B.O. director with the intention of getting someone who’s going to apply voodoo economics to the budget, that’s a real problem,” said Representative Chris Van Hollen of Maryland, the ranking Democrat on the House Budget Committee. “If they’re looking for someone who is going to cook the books, that’s a real problem.” So far, no director has taken the C.B.O. down a partisan rabbit hole. “Every time, people worry about politicization,” said Mr. Holtz-Eakin, who has become increasingly aligned with conservative politics since leaving the budget office. “It is in the statute that it be nonpartisan, and I generally don’t fall out of bed wanting to break the law. And it’s in the DNA of the staff.” Ms. Rivlin said it was possible for a director to warp the institution, asserting more partisan leadership, prompting staff departures and replacing them with more partisan appointments. But, she said, “It never has, because both parties have appointed directors who understand the mission of C.B.O. is to be very nonpartisan and have made an effort to not inject their own views into the picture.” This transition has been more perilous than most. Mr. Elmendorf has told congressional leaders and committee chairmen that he wants another term. But aides close to the budget committees say the incoming leadership is looking at a host of new names. The Capitol Hill newspaper Roll Call has already floated possible replacements. Some, like Jeffrey R. Brown of the University of Illinois and Katherine Baicker of Harvard University, are respected Republican academic economists. Others are more partisan, such as Warren Payne, the House Ways and Means Committee’s Republican policy director; J. D. Foster, the deputy chief economist for the U.S. Chamber of Commerce, formerly of the Heritage Foundation; and James C. Capretta, a frequent contributor to National Review. That list prompted an outpouring of concern among an eclectic group of economists on the right. N. Gregory Mankiw of Harvard, a former chairman of George W. Bush’s Council of Economic Advisers, called for Mr. Elmendorf’s reappointment on his blog : “I understand that G.O.P. leaders may be tempted to put their own stamp on the Congressional Budget Office. But sometimes the benefits of continuity transcend ideology and political affiliation.” “Dynamic scoring is more realistic, because the path of the economy responds to changes in tax policy,” Mr. Mankiw said in an email response to questions last week. “The problem is that there is substantial disagreement about which models are most appropriate for estimating those responses. Static scoring makes the clearly wrong assumption that tax policy does not influence the economy, but it has the virtue of being less model-dependent and thus more easily understood.” Casey B. Mulligan, a conservative economist at the University of Chicago, laid out his “ reasons to continue the Elmendorf era .” Keith Hennessey, a top Bush adviser, weighed in , as did Charles Murray and Alan D. Viard of the American Enterprise Institute. Still, like his counterparts in the House, the incoming Senate Finance Committee chairman, Orrin G. Hatch, also believes the C.B.O. should be taking another stab at dynamic scoring. Currently, the budget office and the White House Office of Management and Budget use “static scoring” on most bills, assessing the cost of tax cuts and spending bills primarily as simple subtraction from revenue or addition to spending totals. “What’s wrong with C.B.O. and O.M.B. doing both a static report and a dynamic report?” Mr. Hatch asked. “It’s stupid to do the one and not do the other.” Given that perspective among prominent Republicans and continuing conflict over the Affordable Care Act, congressional aides say the betting is against Mr. Elmendorf, whose positive assessments of the cost and impact of the health care law have angered conservative activists for years. His replacement, they say, would signal that Republicans are serious about change. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page B 1 of the New York edition with the headline: G.O.P. Split Over Budget Scorekeeper . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              