   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Sunday Review Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by The Public Editor Did Reddit Boss Coverage Cross a Line? By  Margaret Sullivan July 18, 2015 THE scene in Disney’s “Inside Out” might not have meant much to the kids in the movie audience, but for me, it was priceless: While riding on the Train of Thought, a character, Joy, tips over two cargo boxes, one labeled “facts,” the other “opinion.” The spilled pieces mingle, and she suggests that trying to undo the mix-up is pointless: “These facts and opinions look so similar!” But for many readers who complained to me about a recent story on the ouster of Reddit’s chief executive officer, Ellen Pao, it’s important for news stories to keep facts and commentary separate. And, they say, in this particular story, that didn’t happen. Some readers also objected to the sweeping changes in the story about Ms. Pao’s departure from the high-traffic site that sometimes calls itself “the front page of the Internet.” They complained that what was initially a neutral news story, which went online about 5 p.m. on July 10, morphed into an opinion piece a few hours later, with no explanation to readers. That version was what print readers saw on the front page the next morning. And many readers disagreed with the implication of the story – that Ms. Pao was fired because of sexism rather than because she was a poor leader. The headline read: “It’s Silicon Valley 2, Ellen Pao 0: Fighter of Sexism is Out at Reddit.” (Ms. Pao lost a highly publicized sex discrimination lawsuit against a previous employer in March.) Nicholas Jervey of Columbus wrote that he was “baffled by the total rewrite of Mike Isaac’s article on Ellen Pao’s resignation,” and wanted to know why the article was “rewritten from a neutral tone to what I’d call an accusatory, combative tone.” Charlotte Gauthier of Berlin, who described herself as a woman working in technology and is a former Times employee (she was a web analyst), charged that the story “does a disservice to women in technology,” partly by portraying Ms. Pao as “a hapless victim of the sexism of redditors, and by heavily implying that her exit from Reddit was based solely on this sexism.” Another writer wanted to know “to what extent are NYT articles fluid, changing beings?” and asked, “At what point should an article, instead of being revised, be given its own URL?” Pui-Wing Tam, the technology editor, told me in an email that it’s standard procedure with breaking news — at The Times and elsewhere — to publish a nuts-and-bolts news story and then deepen it with more reporting and context. For example, she said, “When Twitter C.E.O. Dick Costolo stepped down last month, we had a short version of the story out quickly, written by one reporter. We then updated multiple times to end with a two-byline story that had a feature-y lead and with far more material about Costolo and his arc at Twitter.” The final version, she said, as with the Pao story, “looked very different from the bare-bones one that first went up online.” Philip B. Corbett, the Times’s standards editor, told me that most readers don’t want to see every iteration of a story — they just want the deepest and most fully reported story available. For that reason, there is no need to say to readers, in effect, “this is an evolving story that has changed from when it first went online.” Did a news story become, in effect, an opinion piece? Mike Isaac, a talented and prolific technology reporter for The Times, said that certainly had not been his intention. Rather, he (and David Streitfeld who joined him in writing the final piece) wanted to include as much background and context as possible. “I don’t think it veered into opinion,” Mr. Isaac said. “It was analysis, backed up by reporting, and written under tight deadline.” He’s probably right. The issue is whether, in this case, the analysis swallowed the news. I often hear from readers that they would prefer a straight, neutral treatment — just the facts. But The Times has moved away from that, reflecting editors’ reasonable belief that the basics can be found in many news outlets, every minute of the day. They want to provide “value-added” coverage. Often, that works well, but not always. A recent story about a balcony collapse in California began as straight news about the young people from Ireland who died, but by the time the story hit print, it was a “second-day” approach about an international visa program. The story caused legitimate hard feelings because it seemed critical of the victims. In the case of the Reddit story, what many readers objected to most was framing the story as about Silicon Valley sexism, rather than about Ms. Pao’s failings as a corporate leader. Ms. Tam said that, in hindsight, “there was probably more we could have included about Ms. Pao and some of her missteps at Reddit.” Mr. Isaac agreed: “I wish I had included other reasons behind Ellen’s ouster.” Those angles have been covered in many other Times stories, both noted. Certainly, the headline went too far in suggesting that this was simply a story about a victim of sexism. In general, I think that The Times handles breaking news well, and I see no reason to flag readers about most online changes. That would quickly become cumbersome. And I agree that most readers appreciate context and analysis — it is, after all, what distinguishes Times coverage from the “commodity news” that one can get anywhere. This story, on a highly charged subject, was an extreme case, however. Offering readers a straight news story, accompanied by a separate analysis, labeled as such, might have been a better approach. Alternatively, a single news story could have provided more balance and less point of view. Sometimes, the effort to “add value” can go off track. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page SR 9 of the New York edition with the headline: Did Reddit Boss Coverage Cross a Line? . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              