   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Business Day Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Common Sense Disney v. Warner: How Captain America Beat Batman and Superman Image Chris Evans as Captain America in “Captain America: Civil War” from Disney. Credit Walt Disney Studios Motion Pictures By  James B. Stewart May 26, 2016 Pitched battles between superheroes with huge fan bases? Check. Enough explosions to flatten several Manhattans? Check. Budgets over $250 million, not counting lavish marketing campaigns? Double-check. On paper, this season’s big superhero action films — “Captain America: Civil War” and “Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice” — from the rival studios Disney and Warner Bros. could almost be the same movie, so similar are their plots, action sequences and allusions to heavyweight themes of topical interest. Still, “Batman v Superman” would seem to have the edge where it really matters to the studios, which is at the box office. It opened first (on March 25). It had the two most valuable intellectual properties in the comic book universe, appearing together in starring roles. And it had enough A-list Hollywood talent to fill a multiplex. Yet the results are in, and it’s not even close. The theatrical run of “Batman v Superman” is all but over, with a worldwide box office gross of $871 million. “Captain America” has surged past $1 billion in just three weeks. Warner insists its film will earn a profit. But given that the studio gets only about half the box-office gross, any profit margin will be slim after deducting the film’s enormous production and marketing costs. And that has to be a disappointment considering what the studio must have expected. (Marvel’s “Avengers” topped $1.5 billion in 2012.) More worrisome for Warner and its parent, Time Warner Inc., is that “Batman v Superman” was supposed to reboot the entire DC Comics universe and create a multibillion-dollar superhero franchise to rival Marvel’s. Now that’s in question. “This is a significant misstep for the DC brand,” said Doug Creutz, senior media and entertainment analyst for Cowen & Company. “They’ve damaged their credibility with their audience. I’m not saying they can’t recover, but their next few movies had better be really good.” At one level, the explanation for the outcome is simple: “Captain America” is a much better movie. After a marathon of superhero moviegoing in Times Square this week, I can attest to that. As a baby boomer who grew up glued to the Adam West “Batman” series that ran on TV from 1966 to 1968, I’m hardly a member of the high-testosterone teenage target audience. But I like a superhero blockbuster from time to time, and I appreciate good characters who convey some development over time, and a coherent (even if far-fetched) plot. All of which “Batman v Superman” lacked. Despite some arresting visuals, the film focuses so intently on the flaws that drive its titular superheroes into battle that it manages to undermine the appeal of both characters. That left me with no one to root for and indifferent to the outcome. What’s a superhero movie without a hero? “Captain America” sidestepped that problem by never calling into question the essential goodness of its hero characters, instead having them take sides on an issue over which reasonable minds might differ: Should heroes be subject to United Nations oversight? As the Times movie critic A. O. Scott put it , “Collegial Misunderstanding” or “Intramural Pickup Game” would have been a more accurate subtitle than “Civil War.” But you don’t need to take my word for it, or that of the established critics who praised “Captain America” and panned “Batman v Superman.” After a big opening weekend, attendance at “Batman v Superman” plunged , suggesting bad word of mouth. On the website Rotten Tomatoes, 91 percent of the audience said they liked “Captain America.” Just 67 percent liked “Batman v Superman.” The starkly different outcomes show how difficult it is to make a successful blockbuster, even for a studio with an enviable track record like Warner Bros. (“Harry Potter,” “Lord of the Rings”). Sony faltered with its latest Spider-Man installment and forged a partnership with Marvel allowing its superhero to return to the Marvel fold. Fox has at times struggled with its X-Men franchise. But whatever secret code of art and science produces a superhero blockbuster, Disney seems to have cracked it. “Captain America” is the 13th consecutive successful installment in the Marvel film universe. After buying Marvel for $4 billion , Disney has turned even obscure comic book characters into box-office bonanzas (“Ant-Man”), and it has managed to combine them in unexpected yet captivating ways. Image “Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice,” from Warner Bros., starring Ben Affleck, left, and Henry Cavill, was released six weeks before “Captain America: Civil War,” from Disney. Credit Clay Enos/Warner Bros. Pictures Much of the credit goes to Kevin Feige, the 42-year-old president of Marvel Studios, who runs the studio with an unusual degree of artistic independence. He reports to Alan Horn, chairman of Walt Disney Studios, who gives him wide latitude. (Mr. Horn was pushed out as president of Warner Bros. even after overseeing the successful “Dark Knight” Batman trilogy.) People who know him told me Mr. Feige lives and breathes the Marvel universe and has a deep and intuitive understanding of its characters and their fans. “He’s a total film and comic book buff,” said Michael Nathanson, a veteran Hollywood analyst and a partner at MoffettNathanson. While individual directors put their stamp on Marvel films, they ultimately reflect Mr. Feige’s sensibility, and he got the sole producer credit for “Captain America: Civil War.” “He’s the most underappreciated asset in Hollywood,” Mr. Creutz said. “What he’s done is nothing short of a miracle.” By contrast, no one seems sure exactly who is responsible for “Batman v Superman.” Warner has long been known as a director’s studio, meaning ultimate creative control lies with the director, which was presumably the case with the director of “Batman v Superman,” Zack Snyder. Still, “it felt like filmmaking by committee,” Mr. Creutz said. “You can’t just do it by formula. That’s not how creativity works. You need someone with a vision who can make something great. There are only a limited number of people who can do that.” Mr. Snyder may not be one of those people. He previously directed the 2013 Superman reintroduction “Man of Steel,” which wasn’t exactly a resounding success. It grossed about $668 million, and just 75 percent of the audience on Rotten Tomatoes liked it. “I haven’t studied his work, but when Zack Snyder was named, I heard doubts about whether he was the right director for this movie,” Mr. Nathanson said. “He didn’t have the track record to deliver a movie this important.” Mr. Creutz agreed: “Looking at this objectively, he wasn’t the right choice.” The film had two producers: Deborah Snyder, the director’s wife, and Charles Roven, a veteran of Warner’s hugely successful Batman trilogy. But neither works for DC Entertainment. (Geoff Johns, DC’s chief creative officer, was one of six executive producers, along with Christopher Nolan, who directed the Batman trilogy, and Steven Mnuchin, Donald Trump’s national finance chairman.) In trying to emulate Marvel’s approach, Warner may also have been trying to accomplish too much in one film. In addition to putting Batman and Superman into the same film, four other DC characters, all destined for starring roles in future movies, make at least cameo appearances: Wonder Woman, Aquaman, the Flash and Cyborg. Critics objected to the blatant product placement. Wonder Woman seems awkwardly gerrymandered into the plot. Batman delivers a ponderous final speech that could (and probably will) run as a trailer for the forthcoming “Justice League: Part One.” Marvel, too, teases future films (“Spider-Man” and “Black Panther” in “Civil War”) but seems more adept at it. Marvel has invested many years and billions of dollars building its stable of characters. “Audiences have been with these characters for eight to nine years,” Mr. Nathanson said. “They’ve been on a journey with them.” “Marvel,” Mr. Creutz said, “introduced its characters in stand-alone movies. Then it did the big tie-in movie with multiple characters. Warner said, ‘Let’s start with the tie-in movie.’ But multihero and multivillain movies are very hard to pull off.” Warner seems to be heeding the criticism. It recently shuffled the management team overseeing the DC film universe. “We’ve heard from the critics and the fans and the filmmakers who worked on this,” said Dee Dee Myers, head of corporate communications at Warner Bros. “We try to learn from every film and make the best movie we can the next time out. We feel we’re in a good position. We’re very excited about ‘Suicide Squad’ coming out in August and ‘Wonder Woman,’” which is scheduled for June 2017. “Batman v Superman” is just one film, and no one I spoke to faults Warner’s DC strategy. “What Warner is trying to do makes a ton of sense,” Mr. Nathanson said. But execution is difficult. “Hopefully, the saga isn’t over,” he said. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page B 1 of the New York edition with the headline: How ‘Captain America’ Won a Contest of Superhero Franchises . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Related Coverage ‘Captain America: Civil War’ Tops the Box Office, Cementing Disney’s Grip May 8, 2016 Image Adding DreamWorks Would Bolster Comcast in Disney Rivalry April 27, 2016 French Tax Officials Turn Hungry Eye to McDonald’s May 26, 2016 Image Show All Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              