   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index New York Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Skelos’s Son Wanted C.E.O. Removed in Failed Takeover Bid, Witness Says Image State Senator Dean G. Skelos, left, and his son, Adam, arrive during jury selection at federal court Manhattan earlier this week. Credit Kevin Hagen for The New York Times By  William K. Rashbaum and Susanne Craig Nov. 20, 2015 It was a request that would have been extraordinary and unreasonable, no matter who had made it. Adam Skelos, the son of former State Senate Majority Leader Dean G. Skelos, had already gotten work as a government relations consultant at an environmental technology company, AbTech Industries. He got the job, prosecutors have said, because of pressure his father put on a major Manhattan developer, Glenwood Management, which had an interest in AbTech, and which also got him an unrelated $20,000 insurance commission. Now Mr. Skelos, 33, wanted the developer to do more. At a lunch last year with a Glenwood executive, Mr. Skelos asked for help removing AbTech’s founder and chief executive, Glenn R. Rink, from the board of the company’s publicly traded parent — clearing the way for Adam to take over. He told the executive, Charles C. Dorego, he was confident that Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo would lift a state moratorium on fracking, a controversial method of extracting natural gas from the ground. Such a move would be a financial boon to the company. (Mr. Cuomo, a Democrat, announced in December 2014 that he would not lift the ban.) Despite Adam’s attempt that day, Mr. Rink was not removed. The disclosure came on Friday during the second day of Mr. Dorego’s testimony as a prosecution witness at the corruption trial of Senator Skelos and his son in Federal District Court in Manhattan. The men are charged with extortion, bribery and fraud conspiracy in connection with what the government contends are three separate schemes. Two of the schemes involve Glenwood, a large developer of luxury rental apartments. One of those schemes also involves AbTech, which sells storm water remediation products. Prosecutors have suggested that the unsuccessful attempt by the Republican senator’s son, who had no corporate management or environmental experience, to take over AbTech appears to be one of many efforts to pull levers of power to make money. Mr. Dorego has testified under questioning by the prosecutor, Rahul Mukhi, an assistant United States attorney, that Senator Skelos had pressured him more than half a dozen times on behalf of his son. On cross-examination, the senator’s lawyer, G. Robert Gage Jr., went back through each instance, asking Mr. Dorego some version of whether the senator had ever said, “If you don’t do something for Adam, I’m not going to support Glenwood’s real estate positions?” Each time, Mr. Dorego said no. In questioning Mr. Dorego, defense lawyers sought to suggest that Adam Skelos was not hired at AbTech because of pressure from the senator, who, as majority leader, was one of the three most powerful men in Albany. Instead, they suggested that the hiring was influenced by the belief of both Glenwood and Mr. Dorego that their investment in AbTech would profit from Adam’s work there. The scope of the profit potential, however, is unclear. Under cross-examination, Mr. Dorego said that he owned 53,000 shares of stock in AbTech Holdings, the parent company of AbTech Industries. AbTech Holdings’ stock has never been a highflier and the company has not turned a profit as a publicly traded company. Defense lawyers for the senator and his son have argued that prosecutors have tried to criminalize regular politics and the father-son relationship. They have characterized the entire case as overreaching. Testimony on Friday showed that Adam Skelos had as many as 11 sources of income, including some that prosecutors have charged were arranged by Glenwood, between 2010 and 2014. The jury also heard that Mr. Skelos had reason to be motivated by money. In late 2012, Mr. Skelos wanted to buy a house with a pool in Rockville Centre valued at $675,000. He turned to Citibank for a mortgage, but the bank’ raised serious concerns about his application. “Insufficient stability of income,” was one concern, according to documents reviewed by the jury. When Adam Skelos learned the underwriter had concerns, he called John Perfetti, a loan officer, at Citibank. “It wasn’t pleasant,” Mr. Perfetti testified. In a sidebar out of earshot of the jury, a lawyer for the government elaborated, telling the judge that Adam “called a threat in to this particular home mortgage loan originator and threatened to hurt him and go to his house.” The lawyer said Dean Skelos later called Mr. Perfetti and apologized. Still, Adam was determined. In later letters to Citibank, he indicated he had found additional sources of money, including a $4,000 payment from AbTech, which he referred to as a “new client.” Documents showed Adam also got a $50,000 “gift” from his father to help reduce the amount of the mortgage. Ultimately, Citibank lent Adam $417,000 for the house. Jurors also heard testimony from Mr. Dorego that Senator Skelos sometimes complained to the Glenwood executive that his son was struggling financially. The government Friday introduced documents and testimony to the contrary: Adam made $145,513 in 2010 and by 2013 his annual income had increased to $441,099 according to testimony from a special agent with the Federal Bureau of Investigation. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page A 19 of the New York edition with the headline: Skelos’s Son Wanted CEO Removed in Failed Takeover Bid, Witness Says . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              