   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Media Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Charter and Bright House Pursuing Merger Even After Comcast’s Failed Deal By  Emily Steel May 18, 2015 Charter Communications announced Monday that it was going ahead with its $10.4 billion deal for Bright House Networks, signaling the start of a new push to consolidate the country’s cable operators. The transaction was previously agreed to in conjunction with Comcast’s proposed takeover of Time Warner Cable, but was contingent on that deal’s completion. After that deal fell apart, Charter and Bright House had an exclusive 30-day negotiating period, which was set to expire this week. The two companies said on Monday that they were committed to completing the transaction on the same economic and governance terms as the original agreement, which was announced in March. The companies said they had extended a “good faith negotiating period” for an additional 30 days, which keeps Charter’s options open for longer. The deal is not yet signed, and either party could walk away. “We look forward to completing the transaction as planned, and our teams are working together to make that happen,” said Tom Rutledge, chief executive of Charter. The deal would unite Charter, the country’s No. 4 cable operator, with Bright House, the sixth largest. The combined company would become the country’s No. 3 operator, behind Comcast and Time Warner Cable. But perhaps more significant is the additional firepower it would give Charter to pursue a new round of deal activity. Acquiring Bright House would provide Charter with a stronger balance sheet, allowing it to borrow more money to make a cash-rich offer for Time Warner Cable, analysts said. Backed by John C. Malone’s Liberty Broadband, Charter has pushed for industry consolidation for nearly two years. Executives at Charter and Bright House have said that a larger national player would be a strong force in creating new technologies and in negotiations with television groups over rising programming costs. Charter set its sights on Time Warner Cable and started its hostile pursuit in 2013. Time Warner Cable fended off the bid, and Comcast ultimately stepped in last year with its $45 billion offer. Now, Charter and Mr. Malone have another chance at their original target. This time around, executives have signaled that the deal is not likely to take the same hostile route. “Any transaction that goes forward, if one were to occur, will be a friendly transaction,” Gregory B. Maffei, chief executive of Liberty Broadband, said during a recent conference call. Mr. Maffei said Liberty could raise capital to help Charter with its bid for Time Warner Cable and has been approached by many potential partners that would be interested in helping to finance the transaction. He added that he hoped regulators would look more favorably on Charter’s efforts to consolidate, given Charter’s relatively small size compared with Comcast. Some analysts had speculated that Time Warner Cable would have been able to block a deal with Charter by making an acquisition of its own. One likely target had been Bright House, a possibility obviated by the announcement on Monday. “If anything, this helps improve the chances of Charter and Time Warner Cable combining,” said Amy Yong, a media industry analyst, who put the likelihood that Charter and Time Warner Cable would join together as slightly better than 80 percent. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page B 5 of the New York edition with the headline: Charter and Bright House Renew Their Merger Plans . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              