   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Joshua Newman’s Lawyers in Plea Talks in Fraud Case By  Matthew Goldstein June 12, 2015 Federal prosecutors and lawyers for Joshua B. Newman, a serial entrepreneur accused of defrauding more than a dozen investors out of at least $2 million, are engaged in plea negotiations, according to a June 10 court filing. Mr. Newman, 35, was arrested on May 21 and charged by federal prosecutors in Newark with misappropriating some of the money he raised to finance several high-intensity training and workout centers he planned to own and operate in New York and New Jersey. The negotiations could lead to a disposition of the case before a grand jury is asked to indict Mr. Newman. United States Magistrate Judge Steven Mannion of the Federal District Court in Newark granted a request by prosecutors to postpone a decision on whether to seek an indictment until Aug. 18. The criminal complaint filed by federal authorities charged Mr. Newman with two counts of wire fraud. One of Mr. Newman’s lawyers, Priya Chaudhry, could not be reached for comment. Mr. Newman, who graduated from Yale in 2001, had positioned himself in recent years as something of a local spokesman for the high-intensity fitness movement known as CrossFit. At one time, he was the co-founder of one of the larger independently owned CrossFit centers in Manhattan. In April, The New York Times reported on the long list of disgruntled investors in Mr. Newman’s ventures, which included a now-defunct film production company. The investors claimed he had a history of misrepresenting his intentions, not paying them back and bouncing checks that purported to contain partial payments. Many of Mr. Newman’s investors were either Yale graduates or people involved with Internet start-up businesses. Mr. Newman is not affiliated with CrossFit Inc., a fitness consulting firm that provides technical assistance to people looking to operate centers using the CrossFit brand name. The centers are independently run businesses. Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              