   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Business Day Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Common Sense The Limits of the Law in Insider Trading By  James B. Stewart July 18, 2014 The remarkable winning streak of Preet Bharara, the United States attorney for the Southern District of New York, came to an end a little over a week ago when Rengan Rajaratnam, the younger brother of the convicted hedge fund operator Raj Rajaratnam, was acquitted of one count of conspiracy to commit securities fraud. That leaves Mr. Bharara with a still-remarkable 85-1 record in insider trading cases. But that one loss deserves an asterisk. In an unusual move, the judge in the case, Naomi Reice Buchwald, didn’t let most of the case get to the jury. After showing skepticism about the strength of the government’s case almost from the beginning, she dismissed two insider trading counts, leaving only a conspiracy charge for the jury to ponder. But conspiracy to do what? It’s no wonder a jury took less than four hours to find Mr. Rajaratnam innocent. That surely came as no surprise to prosecutors in Mr. Bharara’s office. Letters from prosecutors to the judge indicate that they were upset that she did not let the insider trading counts go to the jury rather than take the rare step of dismissing them — a step the prosecutors can’t appeal. In one letter, they complained that she was “effectively directing a verdict for the defense.” Which raises a question: How might the jury have decided if it was allowed to consider all the evidence? The answer goes far beyond the Rengan Rajaratnam case, and raises some fundamental questions about the state of insider trading laws. The evidence at trial suggests that Rengan Rajaratnam, 43, was a minor lieutenant in the hedge fund empire of his far more successful older brother. Though the younger brother had excellent credentials — the University of Pennsylvania and Stanford Business School — and, to judge from photos, was also thinner, better dressed and better looking than his older brother, none of this seems to have counted for much in the brutally competitive hedge fund environment. The younger Mr. Rajaratnam lasted just a year at SAC Capital Advisors (which later pleaded guilty to insider trading charges unrelated to Mr. Rajaratnam), and his own hedge fund closed. It seems unlikely that he’d have been hired at Galleon were he not Raj Rajaratnam’s brother. Even then, his older brother demoted him several times and he made less money there than some secretaries. While his older brother proved to be an insider trading master — he was found guilty on 14 counts of securities fraud and conspiracy involving multiple deals and sources — and numbered among his tippers such luminaries as Rajat Gupta, the former chief executive of McKinsey and director at Goldman Sachs, the younger Mr. Rajaratnam seems to have been reduced to scraping up just a few crumbs tossed his way. That wasn’t, it appears, for lack of trying. Some of the most intriguing evidence was transcripts of wiretaps in which the younger Mr. Rajaratnam describes his efforts to recruit an inside source at McKinsey, David Palecek, a former classmate of his at Stanford. The younger Mr. Rajaratnam told his brother that Mr. Palecek had “spilled his beans” and “volunteered information” about a secret investment by the Abu Dhabi Investment Authority in the chip maker Advanced Micro Devices. The older Mr. Rajaratnam urged his brother on. We want to “get him and then have access to, you know, be able to chat with him.” He’s “a little dirty, right?” “He’s a little dirty,” the younger brother confirmed. But when the younger Mr. Rajaratnam had tried to pry more information out of him, Mr. Palecek had replied, “You know, the problem, is all my best ideas” are “inside information.” “You know, that’s not a problem,” Mr. Rajaratnam replied. He said that Mr. Palecek’s wife could be hired as “a consultant to Galleon.” “Let me think about that,” Mr. Palecek had said. He was “definitely, you know, thinking about playing ball,” Mr. Rajaratnam assured his older brother. But Mr. Palecek appears to have promptly reported the younger Mr. Rajaratnam’s overtures to another McKinsey partner, Anil Kumar, who was already a source of inside information for the older Mr. Rajaratnam and was, indeed, the original source for the Abu Dhabi investment in A.M.D. Mr. Kumar was understandably disconcerted that Mr. Rajaratnam’s younger brother was indiscreetly talking about the deal to another McKinsey partner, who might have traced it to him. He called the older Mr. Rajaratnam, and suggested he tell his younger brother “to be more discreet about these things.” That seems to have been the end of the courtship. (Mr. Palecek died from an infection in 2010.) And although the Rajaratnam brothers invested in A.M.D. shares based on the information, and the Abu Dhabi investment was duly announced, they had the bad timing to be buying just as Lehman Brothers collapsed and the stock market collapsed, dragging A.M.D. shares with it. (To be guilty of insider trading doesn’t require making a profit, but losses take much of the punch out of the notion that shareholders who sold were victims.) Image Rengan Rajaratnam, left, with his lawyer, Daniel M. Gitner, after his acquittal. Credit Brendan Mcdermid/Reuters The brothers did make money — a total of over $850,000 — on trading in the telecommunications provider Clearwire after the older Mr. Rajaratnam learned from a source at the chip maker Intel that it would be making a major investment in Clearwire in a complex deal involving other companies. The younger Mr. Rajaratnam subsequently bought shares in Clearwire for his own account as well as Galleon’s accounts. Clearwire stock jumped after some details of the proposed deal were reported in The Wall Street Journal, and the brothers and Galleon funds sold shares. Neither brother testified, so there’s no direct evidence as to what, if anything, Mr. Rajaratnam told his younger brother about Clearwire. Mr. Rajaratnam’s source was Rajiv Goel, an Intel executive and a star witness at the older Mr. Rajaratnam’s trial, who testified that he had given the inside information and that Mr. Rajaratnam gave him financial assistance and traded stocks for his benefit. But the evidence suggests the younger Mr. Rajaratnam knew nothing about Mr. Goel until after these trades. So the question for jurors, had they gotten the insider trading counts, was whether they could infer from the fact that the younger brother invested aggressively both for his own account and Galleon’s just after his brother received an inside tip that he knew someone at Intel had breached a duty of confidentiality and gotten some benefit in return for it. That’s a lot of inference. It also puts the case squarely in the middle of a legal thicket of an issue that’s now pending before the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit: How much does a so-called remote tippee — someone like the younger Mr. Rajaratnam, who didn’t get the information himself from an insider — need to know about the identity of the tipper and what the tipper gained by leaking the information? The issue has divided judges in the Southern District of New York. Judge Richard Sullivan of Federal District Court hasn’t required prosecutors to prove that a tippee had knowledge of a personal benefit, noting that professional traders are “savvy enough to understand that there is no such thing as a free lunch.” By that standard, the younger Mr. Rajaratnam, a professional trader who, based on the tapes, was familiar with his brother’s quest for “dirty” sources of inside information, could probably figure out that information came from an insider who was getting something in return for leaking. Another District Court judge, Jed Rakoff, has said that prosecutors must show knowledge of some benefit, but the bar is quite low. The benefit may simply be friendship. Given that there was no evidence the younger Mr. Rajaratnam knew Mr. Goel at the time, that inference would seem to be a stretch. Or, alternatively, did the government have to prove beyond a reasonable doubt that Mr. Rajaratnam knew that Mr. Goel was the source and that his brother was paying him off? That seems to have been Judge Buchwald’s standard and, by that measure, the government clearly failed. From a public perspective, it may not matter: If the younger Mr. Rajaratnam had material, nonpublic information he shouldn’t have gotten and he traded on it, that isn’t fair. Such behavior undermines public confidence in the markets. It’s why so many people mistrust Wall Street and consider investing an unfair and rigged game. By the same token, does it amount to a criminal fraud? Based on his taped remarks, the younger Mr. Rajaratnam is hardly a model of high ethical standards. But it doesn’t seem fair for a person’s freedom to depend on an interpretation of the law that even federal judges can’t agree on. The younger Mr. Rajaratnam now faces civil insider trading charges brought by the Securities and Exchange Commission. This week, both sides said they would stay the case to discuss a settlement. The S.E.C. faces a much lower burden of proof, but in the wake of his acquittal, Mr. Rajaratnam’s lawyer, Daniel M. Gitner, may argue the case should be dismissed. Mr. Gitner said he couldn’t comment on the S.E.C. negotiations, but said Mr. Rajaratnam was innocent, and not just because of a technical legal issue. “The trading activity was at odds with any suggestion that Rengan received inside information,” he said. “As a result, this particular case was about much more than the personal benefit issue. There was a lack of evidence of insider trading, period.” All of this makes the pending Second Circuit ruling even more important. But it may also be time for Congress to pass a statute that more broadly bans insider trading, something that most developed countries (including members of the European Union) have already done, and put an end to the courts’ increasingly tortured attempts to squeeze insider trading into the legal doctrine of fraud. “At this point, we may need a statute,” said Thomas McGrath, a partner at Linklaters in New York and author of a Fordham Law Review article on insider trading enforcement. “The original concept was to prevent unfair access and use of confidential information. But the courts have gotten bogged down in issues of fraud, which brings in elements of states of mind that are very difficult to prove. They’re narrowing the scope of unfair use of information, and getting farther away from the notion of a level playing field.” A version of this article appears in print on , on Page B 1 of the New York edition with the headline: The Limits of the Law in Insider Trading . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Related Coverage Prosecutors’ Winning Streak on Insider Trading Cases Ends July 8, 2014 Image Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              