   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by First Words The Cult of the ‘Amateur’ Image Credit Illustration by Javier Jaén. Chick: Cindy Singleton. Shoe: Antagain. Images via iStock/Getty Images. By  Amanda Hess Nov. 10, 2015 Late in October, the retired brain surgeon Ben Carson took the stage at a Christian college in Colorado and pitched himself as president. ‘‘I love it when people come up to me and they say: ‘B-b-b-b-but-but you’ve never been elected to any public office! You can’t possibly know how to do anything!’ Well, let me tell you something. The ark was built by amateurs. The Titanic was built by professionals.’’ Carson touched his fingertips together and smiled softly to himself. The crowd went nuts. Outside, one Carson supporter pinpointed the surgeon’s appeal: ‘‘People are sick of politicians.’’ Ever since the Tennessee militiaman Andrew Jackson bushwhacked his way to Washington to unseat the son-of-a-president John Quincy Adams in 1828, the outsider path to the presidency has been trod by an Ohio newspaper publisher, a Missouri haberdasher, a Georgia peanut farmer, a California movie star and a Texas oilman. But even these variety-pack presidents made pit stops as senators, governors, cabinet secretaries, military generals or V.P.s before banging on the Oval Office door. Ben Carson operated on babies’ brains and sold his bootstrappy life story in a series of motivational books, details of which have been called into question. Heading into November, he sat atop the Republican presidential polls. Close behind was Donald Trump, the real estate tycoon who starred in a reality show that glamorized firing people and called some Mexican immigrants ‘‘rapists’’ in his campaign announcement. Pundits have branded this political moment ‘‘amateur hour,’’ a term that now registers as an insult. But it has an older meaning, one that betrays America’s sincere enthusiasm for the utterly unprofessional. ‘‘The Original Amateur Hour’’ was America’s first televised variety competition, and from 1948 to 1970, it broadcast the hidden talents of American workers — the juggling machine operator, the housewives’ kitchen band. Viewers at home played armchair critics, voting by phone or postcard to determine which acts returned for the next episode. Reviewing a DVD retrospective of ‘‘Amateur Hour’’ in The New York Times in 2006, the writer Claire Dederer watched a contestant blow smoke out of the back of his jacket while making train sounds on a harmonica but found herself transfixed by his face: He ‘‘actually looks happy,’’ she wrote. ‘‘Not pretend happy, like the ambitious souls on ‘American Idol,’ but truly happy, the way a person looks when he knows he’s onto something really great.’’ Since 1990, most Americans have told Gallup that we get our sense of purpose through our work, but in recent years we also say that we hate our jobs, which must mean on some level that we hate ourselves. Amateurs get their name from the Latin amator, or ‘‘lover,’’ and we turn to them to model a type of work freed from the constraints of the workplace. Win or lose, Ohio State’s football players end their games by rushing to the end zone, joining arms and belting the school’s alma mater with the crowd. We click through videos of supposedly amateur porn performers and feel safe in the fantasy that they’re really getting off. We suspect that traditional politicians have been squeezed by special interests, filtered through focus groups and massaged by advisers before being cleared to approach the podium, whereas the amateurs saunter up to the stage and express who they really are. The idea of effortless authenticity is so attractive that members of the American establishment have vied for more than a century to buy, cheat or counterfeit their way to amateur status. In 1732, Poor Richard’s Almanack circulated the Colonies as the work of ‘‘Poor’’ Richard Saunders, an amateur collector of factoids who dispensed common-sensical values and homespun wisdom. Runaway sales of the almanac series eventually turned its true publisher, Ben Franklin, into one of the Colonies’ wealthiest men. Decades later, dabbling in diplomacy during the Revolutionary War, he sailed to France and pulled the trick on a new audience: The 70-year-old Bostonian fashioned himself as a folksy frontiersman, pulling a weasel-pelt cap over his ringlets and charming the French into opening their purses for the rebel cause. In the Gilded Age, members of the leisure class recast amateurism as an exclusively upper-crust pursuit. The sociologist D. Stanley Eitzen writes that the 19th-century amateur ideal was rigged so that the virtue of participation was gleaned from the absence of financial aid; sport would be ‘‘somehow sullied, tarnished or demeaned if one is paid for performing it.’’ In some sports clubs, artisans and factory workers were disqualified from rowing as ‘‘their work made them physically stronger than gentlemen amateurs.’’ People who built strength and skill through an honest living were branded, amazingly, as cheaters. More than a hundred years later, the amateur still occupies an ambiguous space between dabbler and pro, and where that line is drawn often determines where the power and money flow. The modern keeper of the amateur spirit is the N.C.A.A., which requires collegiate athletes to conform to strict ‘‘amateurism’’ rules — no selling autographs, no signing with agents, no practicing with pros, no salary — to ensure they stay focused on ‘‘obtaining a quality educational experience.’’ The association and its member schools then market the players for millions in licensing fees, ticket sales, alumni donations and apparel tie-ins. If the N.C.A.A. milks the amateur appeal by refusing to pay its players, pornographers do it by lying about who’s on the payroll. As soon as hand-held video cameras made their way into bedrooms, adult-film makers like John (Buttman) Stagliano aped the aesthetic of the private skin flick, staging impromptu run-ins with beach babes and barmaids who were suspiciously eager to have sex on camera for the very first time. (Really, they were seasoned performers who’d negotiated their fees.) Amateurs are now competing with professionals paid to be better amateurs. The cult of the amateur has been completely absorbed into America’s corporate structure. Silicon Valley is built around tales of roving visionaries like Steve Jobs, the guy who dropped out of college, dropped acid and taught us all how to ‘‘Think Different’’ by buying the same electronic devices. Just as the definition of amateur was stretched to control college football players and market porn stars, the distinction between work and leisure has been blurred to recast professional employment as a labor of love. Tech companies coax employees to surrender their free time by styling their office complexes like playgrounds, complete with slides, communal beach cruisers and free frozen yogurt. And their technological innovations have helped the workplace enter the home, where workers are expected to refresh their email until they tuck their phones under their pillows and fall asleep. They’ve even created ways to help us flip our personal lives into professional opportunities: Our closets are now eBay boutiques, our hobbies Etsy shops, our apartments Airbnbs, our cars Ubers and our lunch hours TaskRabbit shifts. In this year’s election, some politicians have taken to impersonating social-media influencers in order to sell themselves to the public. Rand Paul filmed himself shredding the tax code with a chain saw and posted the carnage on his campaign website. Bobby Jindal hit the mat for a BuzzFeed push-up contest. In a viral-baiting video for the conservative IJ Review, Ted Cruz wrapped bacon around a machine-gun barrel and pumped out bullets until the strip sizzled. Presidential candidates have always put on an Everyman act, but never before has that required making breakfast on a gun. At a time when regular folks have become amateur hobbyists of our own lives, the political impersonation of average Americans has emerged as its own kind of vaudeville. The winning act will play for the next four years. Amanda Hess is a contributing writer for the magazine and a staff writer for Slate.  Sign up for our newsletter to get the best of The New York Times Magazine delivered to your inbox every week. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page 17 of the Sunday Magazine with the headline: Unprofessionals . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              