   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Media Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Web Chief Joshua Topolsky to Leave Bloomberg as Staff Tensions Surface By  Ravi Somaiya July 10, 2015 Earlier this year, after Michael Bloomberg reasserted control over the company he founded and began to scrutinize its online operations, he suggested in a meeting that perhaps Bloomberg — which makes the overwhelming majority of its money from desk terminals that provide financial data — did not need to have a website. Joshua Topolsky, the founder of a prominent technology website who had been hired to oversee a glossy reintroduction of Bloomberg’s web properties, responded sarcastically, making fun of the suggestion, according to three people with knowledge of the exchange, who spoke on condition of anonymity. Mr. Bloomberg, who often challenges subordinates with provocative questions, has grown accustomed to deference, the people said. He was furious, and his relationship with Mr. Topolsky subsequently deteriorated to the point that both decided it was better if Mr. Topolsky left. In a statement, Mr. Topolsky said that one of the most interesting and exciting facets of his time at the company was Mr. Bloomberg’s engagement, and that “he says what’s on his mind and you can have a frank conversation with him,” a rarity in the media industry. The dismissal of Mr. Topolsky is a sharp manifestation of what nearly a dozen current and former Bloomberg staff members described as the chaotic environment that has existed at the company since Mr. Bloomberg returned in September 2014. The staff members spoke on condition of anonymity because they did not want to jeopardize their jobs or violate their nondisclosure agreements. The media company consists of different fiefs, encompassing television, radio, a consumer website, Businessweek magazine and a financial newswire, all built around a newsroom of about 2,400 journalists and funded by the lucrative terminal business, which serves subscribers who pay about $21,000 a year. Revenue from subscriptions equaled $9 billion in 2014, or 85 percent of the company’s total revenue. Image Joshua Topolsky was hired in 2014 to oversee Bloomberg's expansion as digital media company. Credit Slaven Vlasic/Getty Images During Mr. Bloomberg’s three terms as mayor of New York, when he stepped away from the company, there was a delicate stalemate between a series of senior figures at the company, the people said. But on his return, he dismissed or moved most of those figures, rekindling feuds among top management. “It really is a game of thrones,” said one former staff member. Most notably, the people said, whether wittingly or not, the moves pitted Justin B. Smith, the man hired in Mr. Bloomberg’s absence to build a sprawling consumer media company, against John Micklethwait, the former editor of The Economist who was hired as editor in chief upon Mr. Bloomberg’s return. Both Mr. Micklethwait and Mr. Smith were told they were in charge. And both report directly to Mr. Bloomberg, who was forced to negotiate a tentative peace between them. Mr. Bloomberg, Mr. Smith and Mr. Micklethwait declined to comment. A major issue, the people said, is that Bloomberg, as a media organization, is struggling to determine exactly what it wants to be. Mr. Bloomberg has a personal fortune of around $36 billion, and the company employs some of the most talented journalists available — it won its first Pulitzer Prize this year. On some days, the people said, he seems bullish about the media company. On others, he seems to see it as a threat to the terminal business, to be managed accordingly. What seems clear to many, and what has been outlined in general terms, is a retrenchment, away from the sprawling media organization that Mr. Smith was tasked with building, and toward one that focuses on subjects most important to the wealthy corporate readers that make up most of its customer base. Mr. Bloomberg and Mr. Micklethwait have signed off on a new editorial project, focused on providing nuanced and timely content, which is hiring several new writers, according to a person briefed on the plans. At a town hall meeting shortly after he arrived, Mr. Micklethwait laid out some of his editorial vision. He told staff members that he wanted to own the company’s “home territory.” That, he said, is “some version of business, finance, markets, technology — and then also what I think of as power.” Those topics, he said, are “of great interest to many of the people who buy terminals.” Mr. Bloomberg has already turned a critical eye to the company’s money-losing television operation, where he surprised some of the staff who did not expect the founder and chief executive of a company to provide detailed input on seemingly minute matters. Image Michael Bloomberg, the media company’s founder, is said to often ask provocative questions and challenge his employees and the strategies of some senior staff members. Credit Hilary Swift/The New York Times He asked one presenter for more on-air arm movement. He asked another to gesticulate with a pen. And he has personally overseen the graphics shown on screen, which now resemble those seen on the terminal. Mr. Bloomberg is also keen to test new ideas, said a person knowledgeable about his management style, whether he agrees with them or not. He is willing to change his mind in the face of new evidence, the person said, and eager to understand the newer aspects of his business. One of his concerns, these people said, was the television show, “With All Due Respect,” featuring the political journalists John Heilemann and Mark Halperin. The two, the authors of popular books about the last two presidential elections, were splashy and expensive hires made by Mr. Smith and Josh Tyrangiel, the editor of Businessweek. Their show has been widely seen as awkward, and on one occasion Mr. Halperin was forced to apologize for an interview he conducted with Senator Ted Cruz, Republican of Texas, in which he questioned Mr. Cruz on his Cuban heritage and asked him to speak Spanish. In the meantime, Bloomberg has shed some of its most experienced political reporters. This week, Dave Weigel, a popular political writer hired with great fanfare less than a year ago, departed for The Washington Post. Those stumbles contributed, said one senior figure at the company, to Mr. Bloomberg’s questioning of Mr. Smith’s media strategy. (A spokesman for Bloomberg said that Mr. Bloomberg “thinks very highly of Justin and they enjoy working together.”) That line of questioning was on display when he turned his attention to the website. The site had been aggressively expanded, with an irreverent aesthetic, under Mr. Smith, Mr. Topolsky and Mr. Tyrangiel, and recently broke its traffic records. But Mr. Bloomberg struggled to understand the thinking behind some of the moves. Unfamiliar with website development, he did not seem to understand that changes were subject to delays as programmers worked on them, said one person with knowledge of the interactions. When he met with employees who were resistant, he occasionally responded by asking whose name was above the door. Some fear, according to one current staff member, that Bloomberg, as a media organization, has “limitless resources but no real ambition from the top to be anything more than a service to terminal customers.” A version of this article appears in print on , on Page B 1 of the New York edition with the headline: Bloomberg Web Chief Is Ousted . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Related Coverage Bloomberg Hires a Founder of The Verge to Lead Online Initiatives July 24, 2014 Image No Longer Shackled by AOL April 3, 2011 Image Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              