   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Opinion Supported by Reaching Out to the Voters the Left Left Behind By  Thomas B. Edsall April 13, 2017 Image In 2016, Luzerne County, which had twice previously cast majorities for Obama, supported Trump 57.9 to 38.6 percent. Credit Mark Makela for The New York Times The devastating recession that began at the end of 2007 and officially ended in June 2009 was the most severe downturn since World War II. The political, social and even medical consequences of this recession have been duly noted, but even so the depths of its effects are only now becoming clear. One we’re still learning more about is how the rural, less populated regions of the country (known among demographers as nonmetropolitan counties), which already suffered from higher than average poverty rates, recovered from the recession at a far slower pace than more populous metropolitan counties. The fact that people living outside big cities were battered so acutely by the recession goes a long way toward explaining President Trump’s victory in the last election. In Luzerne County, in northeast Pennsylvania, population 316,383 and falling, the unemployment rate in February 2017 was 6.7 percent , substantially higher than it had been at the start of the recession (it was at 4.6 percent in October 2007). The total number of people in the county labor force declined by 2,544. In 2016, Luzerne County, which had twice previously cast majorities for Obama, supported Trump 57.9 to 38.6 percent. Similarly, in Defiance County in northwest Ohio, population 38,158 , the unemployment rate rose from 5.3 percent in August 2007 to 5.9 percent in February 2017. The local labor force shrank over this period by 1,379 workers. In 2016, Defiance became much more Republican than it had been: while voters there had supported Romney over Obama 55.5 to 42.2 percent, they supported Trump over Clinton 63.7 to 29.3 percent. Compare Luzerne and Defiance counties to the Los Angeles-Glendale-Long Beach metropolitan area . There, not only did the unemployment rate fall from 5.6 percent in July 2007 to 4.8 percent in February 2017, but total employment grew from 4.68 million to 4.84 million. The greater Los Angeles region — like other densely populated metropolitan areas such as Clark County, which includes Las Vegas, and Dallas County in Texas — recovered strongly and swiftly and supported the Democratic Party in Nov. 2016, from candidates for local office to the president. Trump lost to Clinton in Los Angeles County by 48 points, a substantially larger margin than the 39.5 points by which Romney lost the county to Obama in 2012. The diverging fortunes of metropolitan counties and virtually all nonmetro regions of the country are graphically displayed in the accompanying chart produced by the Department of Agriculture’s Economic Research Service. The chart shows that since the bottom of the recession in the fourth quarter of 2009, metropolitan areas have fully bounced back and are now significantly above their pre-recession employment levels. In contrast, employment in non-metro areas remains well below its pre-recession level. Trump won majorities in counties with populations under one million, and his margin of victory rose as the population numbers got smaller. In counties with fewer than 2,500 people, Trump won 70.6 to 25.1 percent. From another vantage point, Trump did best in regions where economic growth was the worst — where jobs are disappearing and where middle-aged white men and women are dying at younger ages. The crucial role of the financial meltdown and its aftermath in shaping regional politics is also on display in the accompanying chart produced by the Economic Innovation Group , a bipartisan think tank. In the period from 1992 to 1996, communities of 100,000 or less were engines of growth, producing 27 percent of the nation’s new jobs. The large metropolitan areas with populations of over one million produced 16 percent. By 2010 to 2014, the share of new jobs in the lowest population counties shrank to 9 percent, while the share produced in the largest counties grew from 16 to 41 percent. Put still another way, counties with populations below one million have seen their share of job creation drop from 84 percent of the national total in 1992-96 to 78 percent in 2002-06 — and then abruptly plummet to 59 percent in 2010-14. The pattern of net new business creation (new firms minus firms going out of business) reveals an even sharper reversal of fortune. In 1992-96, counties with fewer than 100,000 people produced 32 percent of new enterprises, while the biggest counties produced 13 percent. By 2010-14, very rural counties saw zero net growth in new firms, while the biggest counties boomed with 58 percent of new firms. All counties with populations under a million created 87 percent of the nation’s new businesses from 1992-1996, but the number was 42 percent in 2010-14. In other words, the centuries-long shift of economic activity from country and small town areas to populous urban regions has sharply accelerated over the past 10 years. The result is that “America faces a small-county crisis of dire proportions,” as Mark Muro, a senior fellow at Brookings put it, “and a period of opportunity in cities, the bigger the better.” There is a combination of forces driving these trends, according to Muro, most especially the growing importance of the high tech and digital industries. “Urbanization,” he wrote me, has become a major trend in the last decade or so, driven by the clustering of workers and firms in larger cities. The increased digitization of the economy has accelerated this dynamic, and ensured that changing skills demands have changed what places are best valued. By 2015, 74 percent of all high tech jobs were located in the 100 largest counties “where the universities, technology innovation assets, supply chains, STEM workers, and industry clusters on which the sector depends reside,” Muro wrote in a paper in August, 2016 with two Brookings colleagues, David M. Hart and Siddharth Kulkarni. At the same time, Muro noted by email: Rural America has been hammered by the end of the immediate post-crisis commodity boom and now there is precious little relief there: Agricultural prices are low, coal prices and automation are hammering coal country, natural gas prices are suffering from glut conditions, and meanwhile, no subdivision of the economy is suffering from more moribund employment growth. The rural crisis, according to Muro, “isn’t just economic but is now compounded by the rising mortality rates” described in detail by the economists Anne Case and Angus Deaton. In their most recent published work, “ Mortality and morbidity in the 21st century ,” a Brookings paper, Case and Deaton, who teach at Princeton, update their earlier studies to provide a more complete picture of midlife mortality — by sex and education group, over the full age range of midlife, using shorter age windows, over time, by cause, and by small geographic areas. The Case-Deaton description of rising midlife mortality — especially an increase of “deaths of despair” from alcohol, opioids and suicide — is, in effect, a demographic portrait of many of Trump’s core supporters: whites with a high school degree or less living in rural to medium-sized towns and cities. Case and Deaton show that from 1999 to 2015 mortality rates among non-college whites rose in every age group, most especially among younger whites aged 25-34. The accompanying chart shows the rising “deaths of despair” rates for whites without college degrees, compared to the virtually unchanging rates for whites with degrees. Case and Deaton found that mortality rates for whites were stable or declining in all counties with populations of one million or more — the counties, in other words, that voted decisively for Clinton. Conversely, white mortality rates rose by roughly one percent a year in all counties of less than a million — the counties that voted for Trump. Bill Bishop, co-author of the book “ The Big Sort ” and a founder of The Daily Yonder , makes the case that the political split in America is not an urban-rural divide. Instead, he argues, it is between the largest cities and the rest of America. In an email, Bishop noted that outside of cities of a million or more — and really outside of the 56 central city counties of these large metros — Democrats lose. This applies not only to presidential races, but to the House as well. In a piece for The Daily Yonder, Bishop wrote that “Democrats don’t have a ‘rural problem.’ They have an ‘everywhere-but-big-cities problem’.” He provided data on the pattern of partisan victory in 2014 House races on a scale from super urban to very rural. Democrats won a majority of districts only in the most urban counties, while Republicans won two out of every three in very rural districts. Bishop argued in his email to me that “the split isn’t just about politics. It’s about lifestyle and identity.” Increasingly, where you live is tied into lifestyle and lifestyle aligns with politics. Politics, like lifestyle, is one way we construct our identities. The accelerated shift toward urban prosperity and exurban-to-rural stagnation reinforces polarizing disagreements between city and country on matters ranging from family values to education to child rearing practices to religious faith. The two maps below show results by county in 1992, when Bill Clinton first won the presidency, and in 2016, when Trump did. The maps demonstrate the strategic hurdles currently confronting both parties. In 1992 , Bill Clinton won 1,519 counties to 1,582 carried by George H. W. Bush. In 2016 , Hillary Clinton won majorities in 490 counties to Trump victories in 2622. Obama won 875 counties in 2008 and 693 in 2012. Much attention has been paid to one daunting task facing Republicans: the need to prevent liberal values and ideas from seeping beyond large, urban counties into red counties and states. As the last election demonstrated, the compact geographical distribution of Democratic voters with liberal or progressive ideologies in states that were already blue allowed Trump to win in the Electoral College despite a sizable Democratic victory in the popular vote. Democrats, in turn, must figure out a way to extend their reach beyond the mega-population centers located mostly on the coasts, where cosmopolitan, globalist and post-materialist values dominate. Jeff Spross, the economics correspondent for The Week, wrote in an April 3 essay “ The Dark Side of Cities ”: Trump supporters’ politics may be filtered through the perverse lenses of racial anxiety and cultural reaction. But they are not wrong to look upon cities as distant and alien metropolises that have benefited at rural America’s expense. “So what’s the fix?” Spross asks. Return to the old ways of robust public investment, antitrust enforcement, and tax and regulatory policy to force money back down the income ladder. Stop treating deficit reduction as a goal in itself; rather whatever deficit level maintains full employment is the right one. The technological revolution poses a major problem for Democrats seeking ways to make economic outcomes more equitable by geography and class. In a June 2015 joint interview with the Harvard Business Review , Erik Brynjolfsson and Andrew McAfee, authors of “The Second Machine Age,” argue that it’s “time to start tackling the economic downside of new technologies.” They voice a mixture of pessimism and optimism. McAfee noted that, given current trends, We’ll continue to see the middle class hollowed out and will see growth at the low and high ends. Really good executives, entrepreneurs, investors, and novelists — they will all reap rewards. Yo-Yo Ma won’t be replaced by a robot anytime soon, but financially, I wouldn’t want to be the world’s 100th-best cellist. Brynjolfsson argued, however, that the economic consequences of technological advance can be shaped by policy: Our one confident prediction is that digital technologies will bring the world into an era of more wealth and abundance and less drudgery and toil. But there’s no guarantee that everyone will share in the bounty, and that leaves many people justifiably apprehensive. The outcome — shared prosperity or increasing inequality — will be determined not by technologies but by the choices we make as individuals, organizations, and societies. If we fumble that future — if we build economies and societies that exclude many people from the cycle of prosperity — shame on us. Technological progress is an extraordinarily powerful force, but it’s not destiny. It won’t lift us into utopia or carry us into an unwanted future. The power to do that rests with us human beings. Technologies are merely our tools. For the moment, the Democratic Party is forced to stand by and watch the Trump spectacle, unable to enact policies to address the issues Spross, Brynjolfsson, and McAfee raise. Would better candidates help to enlarge the electorate to appeal to voters whose primary concerns are economic? One place to look toward is the West, where such Democratic governors as Jay Inslee of Washington, John Hickenlooper of Colorado and Steve Bullock of Montana preside. All three have been elected and re-elected in competitive states where to survive politically they have had to balance urban and non-metro bread-and-butter interests. Shifting the focus of attention onto politicians like these would be a modest first step, but for a party struggling to regain its foothold, a modest first step would be a major achievement. The question going forward is whether Democrats can compete more effectively and more efficiently for the votes of those who have been left behind. They should set themselves this challenge.  I invite you to join me on Twitter ( @edsall ). Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter (@NYTopinion) , and sign up for the Opinion Today newsletter . Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              