   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Media Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Common Sense When Family Fortunes Beget Vicious Power Struggles Image Sumner Redstone with his former companions, Manuela Herzer, left, and Sydney Holland, right, in 2013. Credit David Crotty/Patrick McMullan Photography By  James B. Stewart Feb. 11, 2016 Consider the plight of Shari Redstone, the daughter of the billionaire media mogul Sumner Redstone. Much of her family’s fortune is tied to the ailing 92-year-old Mr. Redstone. He owns 80 percent and she owns 20 percent of National Amusements, the private business that controls two giant media companies — Viacom and CBS. Upon Mr. Redstone’s death, his interest passes to a trust with his grandchildren as beneficiaries. But Mr. Redstone hardly set the stage for an orderly transition. He stubbornly held on so long as executive chairman of both CBS and Viacom that shareholders began to question his ability to run the company, especially after a former companion, Manuela Herzer, filed a lawsuit in November questioning his mental competence . He has lavished a fortune — about $140 million, according to court filings and lawyers’ claims — on Ms. Herzer, who at one point was a romantic partner and was designated to take charge of his health care in the event he was found not to be capable. She also claims that Mr. Redstone’s health worsened after he learned that another former girlfriend, Sydney Holland, was involved with another man. Viacom stock has been plunging under the direction of its chief executive, Philippe Dauman, Mr. Redstone’s handpicked successor and longtime confidant. Shares have dropped 27 percent this week and are trading at a roughly six-year low. Restricted from seeing her father until last year, Shari Redstone, 61, spent the holidays with him and appears to be reasserting her interests. In October, Mr. Redstone barred Ms. Herzer from his mansion, revoked the health care directive and cut her out of his will . Ms. Herzer responded with a salacious lawsuit alleging that Mr. Redstone was mentally incompetent and had an insatiable appetite for sex and steak. Last week, Mr. Redstone resigned as executive chairman of CBS and Viacom. Les Moonves, the chief executive of CBS, who has Shari Redstone’s support, assumed the role of CBS chairman. But over Ms. Redstone’s objections, Mr. Dauman was named executive chairman of Viacom. As long as Mr. Redstone is alive and deemed mentally sound, there is little Shari Redstone can do to dislodge Mr. Dauman, who has a friendly board. She was the only Viacom director to vote against Mr. Dauman’s nomination. All this drama would make for a delicious TV mini-series on CBS, or even a feature film from the Viacom-owned Paramount. But students of the richest of the 1 percent have seen this movie before. The annals of business are studded with messy succession struggles and late-in-life romantic entanglements, especially in family-controlled companies coping with an aged entrepreneur like Mr. Redstone. Image Anna Nicole Smith, holding a photo of her husband J. Howard Marshall II, testified during a probate trial in Texas in 2001. Credit Pool photo/Carlos Antonio Rios, via Associated Press “Though often undisclosed, these are common in the history of corporate America,” said William Zabel, a leading trust and estate lawyer at Schulte Roth & Zabel. “The femme fatale often plays a significant role.” Entrepreneurs like Mr. Redstone often resist retirement, said Nigel Nicholson, co-author of the book “Family Wars” and a professor of organizational behavior at the London Business School. “They’re afraid of dying, and that they will die if they have nothing meaningful to do,” Mr. Nicholson said. “Add jealous wives and mistresses and angry children, and you’ve got a recipe for mayhem.” Anyone old enough to remember the Haft family? Herbert Haft, the family patriarch known for his flamboyant pompadour, founded discount drug and bookstore chains, amassed a real estate empire and emerged in the mid-1980s as a feared corporate raider armed with the seemingly unlimited resources of Michael Milken’s junk bonds. After several failed takeover bids and a falling-out over company strategy, Mr. Haft fired his son and handpicked successor, Robert; divorced his longtime wife and business partner, Gloria (after agreeing to pay her $50 million); broke off relations with his other two children; and took up with a younger romantic companion, Myrna Ruben. At 84, Mr. Haft married Ms. Ruben while he was a patient in intensive care. He died two weeks later. In a welter of litigation, most of the family’s assets were sold. A son, Ronald, emerged with control of the real estate. Then there was the case of J. Howard Marshall II, an oil billionaire, investor in Koch Industries and founder of Marshall Petroleum. His family is still embroiled in litigation more than 20 years after his death in 1995. Mr. Marshall, too, turned against his son and designated successor, J. Howard Marshall III. The elder Mr. Marshall dated a succession of former strippers and, at age 89, married the model and former Playboy centerfold Anna Nicole Smith, then 26 years old. He died 13 months later leaving an estate valued at $1.6 billion. (Ms. Smith died in 2007 with the estate still tied up in litigation. Her life has been the subject of books, films and even an opera.) Perhaps an even more extreme case was the family feud that engulfed Gucci, the Italian fashion house, culminating in the killing of the 46-year-old Maurizio Gucci in 1995. An Italian court convicted Mr. Gucci’s ex-wife, Patrizia Reggiani, of murder for hiring a hit man after Mr. Gucci divorced her and embarked on a series of affairs with much younger women. Mr. Gucci had inherited 50 percent of the company from his father and was already feuding and litigating with other family members and heirs. Image Maurizio and Patrizia Gucci, before he was murdered and she was convicted of ordering his killing. Credit Associated Press After Mr. Gucci’s murder, the company went public, enabling family members to cash out. Despite a bitter takeover battle over Gucci between France’s biggest luxury conglomerates, the Gucci brand flourished under the creative director and designer Tom Ford. François Pinault’s French holding company finally acquired a controlling stake in 2001. Ms. Reggiani was released from an Italian prison in 2014 after serving 16 years of her 29-year sentence. As these cases suggest, irreconcilable infighting among families often ends up in a sale. “There’s an awful lot of energy spent on the family dynamic and conflict rather than what’s best for the company moving forward,” said Andrew Keyt, executive director of the Family Business Center of Loyola University Chicago. In such cases, “the only solution may be to get liquidity and go their separate ways.” That could be Viacom’s fate. If Mr. Redstone dies or is declared mentally incompetent, his 80 percent stake will be controlled by a trust with seven trustees: Shari Redstone and her son, Mr. Dauman and four lawyers. (Sumner Redstone has a second child, Brent, who about a decade ago sued National Amusements and cashed out his stake in the family business. He lives on a ranch outside of Denver.) Mr. Zabel said trusts like Mr. Redstone’s, in which family heirs are represented but don’t have a majority, had often worked well, citing the Hearst Corporation, which is governed by a trust. But Hearst has thrived for decades as a private company and none of its trustees or family members are at loggerheads with its management. Its chief executives were selected because they worked well with the family. Mr. Zabel pointed out that the Redstone trustees have a legal duty to act in the interests of the trust’s beneficiaries. That could mean pressing for a sale, or replacing Mr. Dauman. “They can’t just blindly back Dauman,” Mr. Zabel said. “The stock has done so poorly that you could argue they’re violating their duty if they keep him as chief executive.” By comparison, the handoff from Mr. Redstone to Mr. Moonves at CBS seems to have gone smoothly. But CBS has fared much better than Viacom, although its stock is down nearly a third over the last year. And Mr. Moonves isn’t also a trustee. Shari Redstone has argued that it’s a conflict of interest for Mr. Dauman to be both a trustee of the Redstone trust and chief executive of Viacom. Family business transitions can go smoothly and many do, Mr. Keyt said, but it takes years of careful planning and discussion. “It’s a process that, if done well, can take five to 20 years,” he said. “One reason families invest so much time and effort is they don’t want to read the kinds of stories about themselves that they’re seeing now about Sumner Redstone.” A version of this article appears in print on , on Page B 1 of the New York edition with the headline: When Family Fortunes Beget Vicious Power Struggles . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Related Coverage Sumner Redstone Revoked $70 Million Bequest to Former Companion Feb. 9, 2016 Image Viacom Chief Is Defensive on Its Weak Earnings Feb. 9, 2016 Image How Sumner Redstone Went From Army Cryptographer to Media Mogul Feb. 6, 2016 Image Show All Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              