   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index U.S. Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Big Names and Big Money in Illinois as Governor Faces Challenges on All Sides Video Meet some of the candidates for governor of Illinois attempting to unseat Bruce Rauner, a Republican and one of the most vulnerable incumbents facing election this year. They include a Kennedy and a Pritzker. Published On March 16, 2018 Credit Image by Rich Saal/The State Journal-Register, via Associated Press By  Julie Bosman March 16, 2018 CHICAGO — Three years ago, Bruce Rauner, a multimillionaire private equity executive, charged into the governor’s office vowing to use “an agenda and a steel backbone” to transform this debt-laden state, where no Republican had been elected to the job in more than a decade. But the bold declarations of Mr. Rauner, who arrived pledging to “shake things up,” have wilted some. As he runs for a second term, Mr. Rauner is one of the most vulnerable incumbent governors in the nation, having spent much of his brief political career clashing with Democrats who control the State Legislature over labor unions, taxes, the state’s budget and schools. “I’m not in charge,” the governor said after leaving an Illinois Farm Bureau conference not long ago. “I’m trying to get to be in charge.” Mr. Rauner, 61, who sold himself as an outsider who would bring a businessman’s sensibility to the task of untangling Illinois’s political and fiscal morass, now finds himself fighting for re-election on two dizzying fronts. On the right, Jeanne Ives, a Republican legislator and Army veteran known for her hard-right stances on taxes, immigration and abortion, has forced him into a contested primary on Tuesday. And on the left, a who’s who of Democratic circles wants to take on Mr. Rauner this fall, including J.B. Pritzker, a billionaire heir and entrepreneur; Chris Kennedy, a businessman and son of Robert F. Kennedy; and Daniel Biss, a suburban state senator. It is a campaign that has hopscotched wildly from issue to issue — race, pensions, sexual harassment, clean water, guns, the flight of Illinoisans from their own state, blame for the state’s endless political stalemate, and more. It is on track to be among the most expensive races for governor in history , with more than $150 million raised so far, and Mr. Rauner and Mr. Pritzker sitting on vast reserves of personal wealth to pour into their campaigns. Democrats here, already holding large majorities in the Legislature, are hoping to be part of a national wave that could return control of the governorship to them as well. Still, for all the national forces and echoes of national issues running through this race, it is in other ways just about Illinois — and this state’s unique brand of politics. The race, for instance, has been haunted by ghosts of governors past. Months ago, recordings emerged of old telephone conversations between Mr. Pritzker and Rod R. Blagojevich, the former Democratic governor who was accused of trying to sell the Senate seat Barack Obama vacated to become president. On one tape from 2008, collected as part of an F.B.I. wiretapping of Mr. Blagojevich, Mr. Pritzker suggested that Mr. Blagojevich appoint Jesse White, the longtime Illinois secretary of state, who is black, to fill the empty Senate seat. On the secretly recorded conversation, Mr. Pritzker called Mr. White “the least offensive” choice who would provide cover “on the African-American thing.” Mr. Pritzker has since apologized for his comments, which have threatened to derail crucial support among black voters. (Mr. Blagojevich was convicted of corruption charges in 2011 and is currently serving a 14-year sentence at a federal prison in Colorado.) Image J.B. Pritzker, a billionaire heir and entrepreneur who is running as a Democratic candidate for governor. Credit Marcus Dipaola/Chicago Sun-Times, via Associated Press As governor, Mr. Rauner is perhaps best known for presiding over a budget crisis that paralyzed Illinois for two years, pressing for so-called right-to-work provisions, and publicly sparring with Michael J. Madigan, the powerful Democratic speaker of the House who also serves as the chairman of the state’s Democratic Party. On the campaign trail, Mr. Rauner sometimes seems to be running not against his actual opponents, but against Mr. Madigan, whose longstanding, entrenched role at the center of state politics has become a matter of debate. In recent weeks, Mr. Madigan has been under intense scrutiny for his handling of sexual harassment complaints at the Capitol and in his political organization. Mr. Rauner has wrestled with his own controversies. He recently spent a week at a state-run veterans’ home linked to the deaths of 13 people from Legionnaires’ disease in a gesture that reminded Chicagoans of the time in 1981 when then-Mayor Jane M. Byrne moved briefly — and very publicly — into the city’s Cabrini-Green public housing project . Mr. Rauner declined an interview. “Throughout his first term, Gov. Rauner has worked to grow good jobs, fight corruption and save taxpayer dollars,” Will Allison, a spokesman for Mr. Rauner’s campaign, said in an email. “The governor’s reform agenda is the perfect contrast to J.B. Pritzker’s outspoken willingness to raise taxes and embrace one-party rule in Illinois under Mike Madigan.” Mr. Pritzker, 53, has received prized endorsements from Senator Richard J. Durbin, Democrat of Illinois, and labor unions including the Illinois A.F.L.-C.I.O. After holding a campaign round table last month with Latino legislators at a Mexican restaurant in Chicago’s Bucktown neighborhood, Mr. Pritzker said that he had decided to run because of his concern that the state is “under siege,” led by a governor “who is a failure.” Mr. Pritzker, a member of a prominent Chicago family and an heir to the Hyatt hotel chain with personal wealth of $3.5 billion, according to Forbes magazine, said Mr. Rauner had fallen short of his promises to help residents of downstate Illinois, where job losses have taken a toll on the economy. “Bruce Rauner kind of put on his Carhartt jacket and tried to convince people in central and southern Illinois that he’s one of them. He’s from Winnetka,” Mr. Pritzker said, referring to the moneyed North Shore suburb where Mr. Rauner owns a house. “He told them he was going to stand up for them, and he hasn’t.” But before Mr. Pritzker has a chance to challenge Mr. Rauner, he must fend off two other leading Democratic candidates, Mr. Kennedy and Mr. Biss, a task that may have become more difficult as he faces questions about his finances and after his comments on race to Mr. Blagojevich. Mr. Kennedy, a real-estate developer, said in an interview that he had decided to run partly because of his worries over people leaving Illinois, a sign of economic decline. Mr. Rauner was given a chance to succeed and has failed, he said. Image From left, Mr. Pritzker, Chris Kennedy, State Senator Daniel Biss, Bob Daiber, Tio Hardiman, and Robert Marshall at a candidates forum in Chicago in January. Credit Pool photo by John J. Kim “I think he’s emerged as the worst governor in the history of Illinois and maybe the worst sitting governor in the United States,” Mr. Kennedy said. “Maybe he was a good investor, but he’s a terrible C.E.O.” After Mr. Pritzker’s tape-recorded conversations with Mr. Blagojevich were released, Bishop Larry Trotter, senior pastor of Sweet Holy Spirit Church on the South Side of Chicago, withdrew an invitation for Mr. Pritzker to speak to his congregation, he said, because there “was such rage in the community” over his remarks. “A white, wealthy man gets to say whatever he wants to say about black people and insult black people. How can he be our governor?” he asked in an interview. After meeting with Mr. Pritzker, the bishop reinstated the invitation to speak at his church, which Mr. Pritzker accepted, a spokeswoman for the candidate said. For the moment, Mr. Rauner must contend with Ms. Ives, his Republican challenger in next week’s race. Mr. Rauner has dismissed her as a “fringe” candidate, but Ms. Ives, a lawmaker from suburban Wheaton who graduated from West Point, portrays herself as the true conservative in the race. She says Mr. Rauner is too moderate on social issues. She has described same-sex partnerships as “completely disordered” relationships that endanger children, and has rejected the idea of transgender rights, “something that is made up from the media.” Ms. Ives was widely criticized for a campaign ad featuring actors playing a transgender woman, a Chicago public school teacher and a female activist wearing a pink knit “pussy hat.” But Ms. Ives’s positions have attracted supporters like Richard Uihlein, a wealthy Illinois businessman known for championing conservative candidates, who has donated $2.5 million to her campaign. At a bipartisan candidate forum in Chicago in January, Ms. Ives addressed the issue of gun violence. “And you know how you’re going to solve it? Fathers in the home,” she said, as the audience booed. Perhaps most offended was Mr. Kennedy, who was 4 years old in 1968 when his father, Robert F. Kennedy, was assassinated. “Well, I wish I could agree with you. I didn’t have a father in my life. Somebody shot him,” he said, as audience members clapped and rose to their feet. Mr. Kennedy then walked off the stage and left the building. Related Coverage Illinois Governor Signs Abortion Bill, Angering Fellow Republicans Sept. 28, 2017 Image A Wealthy Governor and His Friends Are Remaking Illinois Nov. 29, 2015 Image Illinois Lawmakers Override Budget Veto, Ending Two-Year Stalemate July 6, 2017 Image Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              