   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Opinion Supported by Letters Bemoaning a Tax Plan Favoring the Rich Nov. 16, 2017 Image Credit Al Drago for The New York Times To the Editor: Re “ House Passes Tax Bill in Major Step Toward Overhaul ” (news article, nytimes.com, Nov. 16): I am one of the millions of middle-class Americans who would experience a significant increase in my tax bill under the Republican tax plans. A higher tax bill is disappointing, but what is infuriating is that I will be paying higher taxes and no common good will come from it. My higher taxes are not going to reduce the deficit. My higher taxes will do nothing to invest in the future of our country through education, research and development, infrastructure or health care. My higher tax bill has one purpose only, which is to provide revenue to enable tax breaks for the wealthy while staying within the allowed boundaries for deficit increases. I am happy to pay my fair share of taxes. I am even happy to pay more taxes to invest in education, health care and infrastructure. It is shameful that I am paying higher taxes to give tax breaks to the 1 percent. DONNA NAWALKOWSKY, CINCINNATI To the Editor: The Republicans’ tax proposals seem to indicate that they don’t care if their deficits drive the government toward bankruptcy. But they enable the Democrats to get in the game and lay claim to the populist mantle that is rightly theirs. Democrats should continue to oppose the give-more-to-those-who-need-it-least proposals, including the end of the alternative minimum tax, weakening of the inheritance tax and lower rates for high earners. But the Democrats should make clear what they could support and vote for: Republican proposals for a much higher standard deduction, lower corporate taxes and a simplified tax code. One conclusion from the recent state elections is that voters are desperate for a functioning government. The Republicans’ self-immolation on health care demonstrates the sterility of “just say no.” Saying “yes” to acceptable parts of the Republican tax agenda could focus the debate on the other parts. WILLIAM B. WOOD, WASHINGTON The writer is a retired Foreign Service officer and ambassador. To the Editor: Re “ Senate Defection Casts Tax Plan in Uncertainty ” (front page, Nov. 16): ’Tis the season for Republican tax reform. Ebenezer Scrooge would endorse the House and Senate tax plans, which call for billions of dollars in tax cuts that will mostly benefit the richest Americans. I say, Bah humbug. Charles Dickens was troubled by the bleak economic gulf between rich and poor in the 19th century. He appealed to the conscience of England via “A Christmas Carol .” Even the selfish heart of Scrooge was transformed once he saw the poor as his fellow human beings. In this season of runaway economic inequality, dare we hope for a change in congressional hearts? Every member of Congress deserves a visit from the Ghost of the Future, November 2018: “Shame on you for giving tax breaks to the mega-rich. Your constituents just voted you out of office.” Wake up, Congress. You can still avoid a moral reckoning if you choose. CARRIE SCHERPELZ, MADISON, WIS. To the Editor: “ A Tax Loophole for the Rich That Just Won’t Die ,” by James B. Stewart (Common Sense column, Nov. 10), explains clearly why the carried interest loophole needs to be closed. And as it details, the changes proposed by the Republican tax bill that passed the House are little more than a fig leaf. For many years, I and other Democrats on Capitol Hill have been working to end this unfair tax dodge, which allows private equity managers and other incredibly wealthy individuals to claim a much lower tax rate than ordinary Americans. Last week, I offered an amendment to the Republican tax bill that would have fully closed the carried interest loophole. Despite President Trump’s promise to close the loophole, Republicans voted that amendment down. Even as they attempt to end so many tax deductions that middle-income families depend on, Republicans remain unwilling to close loopholes for the very wealthy. SANDER M. LEVIN, ROYAL OAK, MICH. The writer represents the Ninth Congressional District in Michigan. To the Editor: The House tax bill contains a provision that could devastate scientific research in America. The bill in its current form will repeal Section 117(d) of the tax code, which allows Ph.D. students who receive a tuition waiver not to pay taxes on that money. For example, typical graduate students may receive a stipend of $30,000 and a tuition waiver for $50,000, which they will never see. This bill will treat them as if they had earned $80,000. It would reduce take-home pay to an unlivable amount for the vast majority of students. This provision must be killed if we want to continue training the best scientists in the world and investing in critical scientific research. ELINA EL-BADRY, ATLANTA The writer is a student in the graduate program in immunology and molecular pathogenesis at Emory University. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page A 26 of the New York edition with the headline: Bemoaning a Tax Plan Favoring the Rich . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              