   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Television Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by ‘Empire’ Returns for Its Second Season, Still Juicy With Melodrama Image Taraji P. Henson, left, and Terrence Howard return in the season premiere of “Empire,” which had a snowballing audience as a new show on Fox. Credit Chuck Hodes/Fox By  Mike Hale Sept. 22, 2015 “Empire” returns for its second season on Fox with a show of power. Several, actually. The scene is Central Park, where Cookie Lyon (Taraji P. Henson) is the ringmaster of a combination concert and rally calling for — Season 1 spoilers from here — freedom for her imprisoned ex-husband, Lucious (Terrence Howard). That Lucious is actually guilty of the murder of which he’s accused is a minor consideration, given that while she’s calling for “justice,” she’s simultaneously plotting to force him out of the family music business, Empire Entertainment. As Cookie sees to every detail, she also glad-hands a series of prominent African-Americans, who play themselves: The Rev. Al Sharpton gets a brushoff, the fashion maven André Leon Talley is fawned over, CNN’s Don Lemon receives a symbolic pat on the back. It’s a sign of the clout already accrued by Cookie, only recently released from prison herself, and a sign of the cachet a television series gathers when it increases its audience for 12 straight weeks, as “Empire” did when it became a rookie sensation just six months ago. A guest spot on the show is clearly a coveted commodity, something to be lobbied for, and later in the episode, Chris Rock and Marisa Tomei show up, playing actual characters. Image Terrence Howard as Lucious Lyon in the prison yard where he is serving time for a killing and, while he is sidelined, possibly losing his hold on the family music business. Credit Chuck Hodes/Fox. That opening scene from Wednesday night’s season premiere, with its “Free Lucious” posters and speeches about a “system that must be dismantled piece by piece,” is an anomaly. “Empire,” while telling a story that involves hip-hop, drug gangs and a wealthy and powerful black family, has largely avoided any explicit engagement with politics or current affairs. And even in that scene, there’s a taste of the over-the-top style — the narrative opulence — that characterizes the show: An important figure takes the stage at the concert from above, having been lowered in a cage, wearing a gorilla suit, pawing and pounding the bars. That’s the kind of touch that “Empire” offers casually, without embarrassment. And the rest of the episode dives back into the rich current of melodrama that is, you have to assume, mostly responsible for the show’s ratings. Boardroom showdowns, prison yard staredowns and grisly death threats are all on display in just that first hour. “Empire” is peak prime-time soap opera for better and for worse. The gleeful entertainment it provides comes with whiplash-inducing plot twists — the fortunes of the opposing factions of the Lyon family seesaw throughout the season premiere — and often with dialogue that, in mouths other than Ms. Henson’s and Mr. Howard’s, would barely pass muster in daytime. Video It’s fall premiere season, and there’s more TV than ever. Here’s a quick survey of what’s new out there. Published On Sept. 22, 2015 Credit Image by Virginia Sherwood/NBC And sometimes the high-profile guest stars aren’t a good match with the show’s hyperbolic style. Ms. Tomei has fun with the nastier lines given to her character, a lesbian businesswoman brought in to finance Cookie’s attempted takeover, but overall she’s bland in the part. Mr. Rock is even more exposed in his role as a dangerous drug dealer who was sent to prison because of Cookie’s testimony. When Lucious says to him, “You inspire fear,” even Mr. Howard can’t make the line convincing. Still, the ripeness and sureness of the melodrama are what makes “Empire” fun. What makes it good, paradoxically, are the absolutely assured, tightly controlled performances of Ms. Henson and Mr. Howard, who are the calm eyes in the storm of contrivance. Mr. Howard exudes self-confidence as the self-made tycoon Lucious, and he embodies the character’s smug sentimentalism without making it in any way diminishing or unattractive — he plays on the worst aspects of Lucious and still makes you respect him. Little more needs to be said about Ms. Henson’s brilliant performance as Cookie, which captures strength, pain, intelligence and raunchy playfulness in the set of her shoulders and the perfect calibration of pursed lips, narrowed eyes and cocked head. Viola Davis , the history-making winner (over Ms. Henson) of a best-actress Emmy for “How to Get Away With Murder,” is impressive in a sometimes daunting way, but no one is more impressively human than Ms. Henson, or funnier. Juicy, old-fashioned nighttime soaps are not a large presence on television — dark mysteries still have the upper hand — and it’s notable that the most prominent recent examples tend to be created by black writer-producers: Lee Daniels of “Empire,” Tyler Perry of “The Haves and Have Nots,” Shonda Rhimes of “Scandal.” (You could argue that John Ridley’s “American Crime” was an over-the-top melodrama with all the fun leached out.) “Empire” is set in the world of hip-hop and R&B and nearly all the significant characters are black, but it succeeds primarily because we can all imagine ourselves as Lucious and Cookie, sharing a laugh in a prison visiting room and saying, ruefully, “It’s crazy how I can love your ass and hate you at the same moment.” A version of this article appears in print on , on Page C 1 of the New York edition with the headline: A Soap Still Luxuriating in Its Lather . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Related Coverage ‘Empire’ Season 2 Premiere Recap: Gorilla Suits, Lesbian Financiers and Chris Rock Sept. 23, 2015 Image ‘Empire’ and Cookie Are Back, and Grabbing Fashion’s Eye Sept. 23, 2015 Image Review: In Fox’s ‘Rosewood,’ a Cocky Crime Pathologist in Sultry Miami Sept. 22, 2015 Image Show All Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              