   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Weddings Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Sarah Davidson, Spencer Hoffman Image Credit Nina Fuller Oct. 8, 2017 Sarah Cobb Davidson and James Spencer Hoffman were married Oct. 6 at Henry Hudson Riverside Park in Hudson, N.Y. E. Shane Hoffman, the groom’s brother and a Universal Life minister, officiated. On Oct. 7, the couple took part in a second ceremony, which included the exchange of rings, led by David C. Hendrickson at Midwood, a historic Hudson River estate owned by the bride’s grandmother Joan K. Davidson, in Germantown, N.Y. The bride and groom met in Colorado Springs at Colorado College, from which they graduated and where Mr. Hendrickson was their political science professor. The bride, who is 31 and works in New York, oversees external affairs for NY Green Bank, the state's clean energy investment fund. The bride also sits on the advisory boards for several nonprofit organizations, including the Environmental Film Festival and the SS Columbia Project, which works to restore an early 20th century steam liner for service on the Hudson River. She is a daughter of Amy Clark Davidson and J. Matthew Davidson of Germantown, N.Y. The bride’s father, who works in Albany, is the special assistant to the commissioner of New York State Office of Parks, Recreation and Historic Preservation. Her mother was until October 2015, the owner of It’s Your Move, a packing business based in Lake Forest, Ill. The groom, also 31, is known as Spencer. He is an associate specializing in real estate finance and affordable housing at the New York law firm Goldstein Hall. He received a law degree from Brooklyn Law School. He is a son of Nina V. Fuller of Hollis, Me., and the late Harrison B. Hoffman, who lived in Falmouth, Me. The groom’s mother, a professional photographer, is the founder and director of Lily Brook Farm, a nonprofit organization in Hollis that uses horses as a therapeutic device in assisting teenagers and others who are leading troubled lives. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page ST 16 of the New York edition with the headline: Sarah Davidson,  James Hoffman . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              