   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Business Day Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by With One Battle Over, a Bigger One Looms for Qualcomm: Apple Image Jerome L. Dodson, founder and chief executive of Parnassus Investments. Its Endeavor fund is one of Qualcomm’s largest shareholders. Credit Elizabeth D. Herman for The New York Times By  James B. Stewart March 15, 2018 Few investors had more at stake in Broadcom’s $117 billion hostile takeover bid for the chip maker Qualcomm than Jerome L. Dodson , the founder and chief executive of Parnassus Investments in San Francisco, and chief portfolio manager for the Parnassus Endeavor mutual fund. Endeavor owns 8.3 million Qualcomm shares, making it one of the company’s largest shareholders. A week ago the shares were worth over $500 million and accounted for nearly 10 percent of Endeavor’s assets, a highly concentrated position. By pursuing a mix of value and socially responsible investing — avoiding companies that harm the environment, and favoring companies that treat their employees well — Mr. Dodson has emerged as one of his generation’s most successful investors. Morningstar ranks his Endeavor fund first among large capitalization blended mutual funds over 10-, five- and three-year periods. Then, this week, President Trump killed Broadcom’s takeover bid on national security grounds, and Qualcomm shares plunged. They dropped more than 5 percent on Tuesday, a $25 million hit to the Endeavor fund. Yet when I spoke to Mr. Dodson this week, he was not only serenely unruffled by the president’s decision — he applauded it. “There’s no doubt I would have made a quick profit if the Broadcom deal had gone through,” he said. “But as a shareholder, I voted against it.” That’s partly because, “as a citizen, I didn’t like the deal,” he said. Broadcom typically slashes costs, especially research and development, and the company said it would do exactly that if it acquired Qualcomm. “In the long run that’s not good for the country or for society,” Mr. Dodson said. He agreed with the Trump administration’s assessment that, by cutting Qualcomm’s research costs, Broadcom would be assisting Chinese rivals in the global race for dominance in 5G communications technology. Image President Trump blocked the takeover of Qualcomm, based in San Diego, by Broadcom on national security grounds this week. Credit Graham Walzer for The New York Times But as an investor, his reasoning can pretty much be reduced to one word: Apple. Apple has traditionally been one of Qualcomm’s biggest customers, along with Samsung and every other major handset company. But the two technology giants are also embroiled in an epic battle over licensing fees for Qualcomm’s patented technology, with profound implications not only for Qualcomm’s business model and Apple’s profit margins, but for the future of wireless communication. If Qualcomm and Apple can just bury the hatchet, Mr. Dodson reasons, Qualcomm’s revenues would soar, and its stock price would climb well past Broadcom’s offering price of $79 a share . By Mr. Dodson’s reckoning, once Apple resumes paying Qualcomm, the chip maker will be worth at least $84 a share, “which is why Broadcom’s offer didn’t really engage my attention,” he said. That, however, is a big “if,” given the intractable positions both sides have staked out. At the heart of the dispute is the way Qualcomm calculates the licensing fee it charges customers, which is a percentage of the cost of the net selling price of the entire handset — and not the price of the chip. That means that Apple, a high-cost producer whose iPhone X sells for as much as $1,000, has paid much higher licensing fees than low-cost competitors using exactly the same chip set. Apple has called the arrangement an “extortion scheme.” It infuriates Apple that Qualcomm has, in effect, been subsidizing its low-cost competitors, including the very Chinese companies that Mr. Trump says he is so concerned about. Qualcomm has countered that its intellectual property makes many of the iPhones’ distinctive features possible, features that low-cost competitors haven’t replicated, and therefore Qualcomm deserves a percentage of the cost of the entire device. Mr. Dodson made little immediate headway when he met with a delegation of top Qualcomm officials late last month and pressed his case for a settlement with Apple. The officials, including the chief executive, Steve Mollenkopf, and Paul Jacobs, a Qualcomm founder and, until recently, executive chairman, visited Mr. Dodson in San Francisco to make their case against the Broadcom bid. In Mr. Dodson’s account of the meeting, he urged the Qualcomm executives to settle with Apple rather than risk alienating it as a customer over the long term. But Qualcomm officials said that Apple was demanding more than they were prepared to give and that, on an engineering level, relations with Apple remained good. They assured him that eventually they would reach a settlement, revenues would normalize and Qualcomm stock would respond. Still, “I’d like to see them budge” on the licensing issue, Mr. Dodson said. “I can see Apple’s point.” But if Qualcomm stopped charging Apple a percentage of the device’s cost, it would probably have to extend similar terms to all its major customers. It recently amended its agreement with Samsung without abandoning its approach to license fees. At the meeting, Qualcomm officials told Mr. Dodson they offered Apple similar terms, but Apple rejected them. A Qualcomm spokeswoman declined to comment, as did an Apple spokeswoman. Long-simmering tensions between Qualcomm and Apple reached a boiling point in 2016, when Qualcomm halted rebates it was giving Apple. Qualcomm claimed Apple had violated the terms of the rebate agreement by cooperating with South Korea’s investigation into what Samsung and others said was exclusionary conduct by Qualcomm. Apple responded by withholding the license fees it paid manufacturers of iPhones, who in turn stopped passing on the payments to Qualcomm. Image Tim Cook, chief executive of Apple. The technology giant has been locked in a fight with Qualcomm over licensing fees that it has called an “extortion scheme.” Credit Aleksandar Plavevski/European Pressphoto Agency Lawsuits and counterclaims erupted, and Qualcomm reduced its revenue estimates by $500 million a year. While Apple has continued to buy and deploy the latest Qualcomm chips, it also reached out to a rival chip maker, Intel, which began supplying an alternative to Qualcomm’s chip for the iPhone 7. (That phone, the iPhone 8 and the X may contain either a Qualcomm or an Intel chip.) Qualcomm claims that Apple has compromised the performance of Qualcomm-equipped handsets in order to mask their superiority over the Intel-equipped phones. (Both Intel and Apple have vehemently denied the claims.) Numerous lawsuits are now well underway in the United States, with some expected to go to trial later this year. Regulators in the European Union, Taiwan, South Korea and China have ruled that Qualcomm’s licensing practices are unlawful and have levied fines, decisions that Qualcomm is appealing. In the United States, the Federal Trade Commission is conducting its own investigation. While armies of patent lawyers fight over the rival claims, investors have already rendered a verdict. Qualcomm shares, after peaking at more than $80 in 2014, dropped by nearly 50 percent, hitting a low of $44 in 2016. Qualcomm’s precipitous decline is what attracted Mr. Dodson’s attention along with other so-called value investors, who look for stocks trading below their intrinsic value. He said his fund’s average cost per share for its Qualcomm position was about $56, so the fund was still ahead even after the deal collapsed this week. On Thursday, Qualcomm was trading at around $60. Still, Qualcomm’s performance has knocked the Endeavor fund from its perch at the top of the Morningstar rankings. So far this year, it’s 61st. Now that Mr. Trump has rescued Qualcomm from the imminent threat of a Broadcom takeover, its financial prospects — and share price — will largely follow the twists and turns in the Apple standoff. While Mr. Dodson remains optimistic about the outcome, that doesn’t mean he’s against all potential takeovers of Qualcomm. Last week, there were rumors that Intel might launch a bid for Broadcom, which made Mr. Dodson wonder: “Why doesn’t it bid for Qualcomm? If Intel bought it, Qualcomm would be in good hands.” “As a citizen, I’d be very comfortable with that,” he said. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page B 1 of the New York edition with the headline: Qualcomm Confronts Next Battle: Apple . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Related Coverage Trump Blocks Broadcom’s Bid for Qualcomm March 12, 2018 Image Apple Adds to Qualcomm’s Troubles, Filing Lawsuit Over Rebates Jan. 20, 2017 Image How Qualcomm Became Vulnerable to a Takeover Bid Nov. 7, 2017 Image Broadcom Drops Bid for Qualcomm After Trump’s Intervention March 14, 2018 Image Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              