   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index NYT Now Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Donald Trump, Orlando, Anton Yelchin: Your Tuesday Briefing Image A grocery store in Cumaná, Venezuela. Years of economic mismanagement, along with low oil prices, have shattered Venezuela’s food supply. Credit Meridith Kohut for The New York Times By  Adeel Hassan June 21, 2016 (Want to get this briefing by email? Here’s the sign-up .) Good morning. Here’s what you need to know: • Trump’s cash disadvantage. Donald J. Trump faces the worst financial gap in recent presidential history: His campaign has $1.3 million on hand, while Hillary Clinton’s has about 32 times as much, $42 million. Mr. Trump has also fired his campaign manager . Image The Trump campaign will need more donations from supporters like these, if it wants to be financially competitive in the general election. Credit Eric Thayer for The New York Times A “super PAC” supporting Mrs. Clinton has taken in its largest haul . We’ve learned that Roy Cohn , Senator Joseph McCarthy’s right-hand man, counseled a young Mr. Trump for many years, nurturing a style of bluster and smears. • Florida police defend actions. After partial transcripts of phone calls by the Orlando gunman, Omar Mateen, were released, officials faced questions about the timing of the assault against him and whether police gunfire had hit any victims. Image Jose Louis Morales is hugged at a cross for his brother Edward Sotomayor Jr., at a makeshift memorial for the victims of the massacre in Orlando. Credit Carlo Allegri/Reuters In the first call, to 911 at 2:35 a.m., Mr. Mateen, 29, declared allegiance to the Islamic State militant group. • Struggle over gun control. Shooting victims’ families kept watch as the Senate voted down four measures on Monday aimed at curbing gun sales. The Supreme Court maintained its practice of tacitly approving state and local limits, turning away a challenge to a Connecticut law banning many semiautomatic rifles. The makers and sellers of the assault rifle used in the mass shooting at Sandy Hook Elementary School in Connecticut are trying to get thrown out before trial a case that would hold them accountable for the massacre. A judge has until October to decide whether Remington can be sued for liability. • Trial in death of Freddie Gray ends. Closing arguments wrapped up Monday in the trial of Caesar R. Goodson Jr. , a police officer charged with second-degree murder in the 2015 death of Freddie Gray. Prosecutors say he drove the van in which Mr. Gray was given a “rough ride” and sustained a neck injury. He died a week later, setting off protests and riots. • Hunger grips Venezuela. Severe food shortages have led to violent protests, looting and death as citizens desperately search for ways to feed themselves. The country’s recent economic collapse has left it unable to produce or import sufficient food. “We are dying as we live,” one woman told us. See our photographs . • U.S. veterans’ plutonium poisoning. The Air Force said that there was no harmful radiation in the aftermath of a 1966 crash of a plane carrying four hydrogen bombs and the lingering problems it has caused for a group of American servicemen and the small Spanish village of Palomares . But interviews with dozens of men and details from declassified documents show otherwise. Business • The Federal Reserve chairwoman , Janet L. Yellen, presents her semiannual testimony on monetary policy today before the Senate Banking Committee. • The Supreme Court ruled 4 to 3 that the tobacco company R.J. Reynolds could not be sued for money laundering by the European Union under an American racketeering law. • The 2015 Jeep Grand Cherokee that rolled backward down a driveway and killed the actor Anton Yelchin had been recalled for a gearshift issue . Noteworthy • Olympics countdown. The International Olympic Committee is expected to confirm today that Russia’s track and field athletes will be barred from the Games in Rio de Janeiro. Image A native Brazilian took part in the Olympic flame torch relay on Monday. Credit Bruno Kelly/Reuters They’ll also urge Brazil to improve security after a Paralympic athlete was robbed at gunpoint . • New books. “Class defines how real people live,” writes the historian Nancy Isenberg in “ White Trash : The 400-Year Untold History of Class in America,” released today. In fiction, the Pulitzer winner Anne Tyler updates Shakespeare’s “Taming of the Shrew” with “ Vinegar Girl .” • Everyone off the couch! If the effects of exercise could be put in a pill and prescribed, it would be rightly hailed as a wonder drug . But instead you’ll have to work out for 30 minutes, five days a week. Exercise also helps your brain grow stronger . • What’s on TV. “ Greenleaf ” is a dramatic series about a family who runs a Memphis megachurch. Its executive producer is Oprah Winfrey (10 p.m. Eastern, OWN). The U.S. men’s soccer team plays Argentina in the semifinals of the Copa América (9 p.m., FS1). • Find your inner musician. Today is Make Music Day , and there are events in more than 700 cities in 120 countries, including the U.S. • Recipe of the day. Get your “deviled” food fix with these chicken thighs . Back Story President Obama’s nomination of Merrick B. Garland to the Supreme Court, which is being blocked by Senate Republicans, brings to mind another Capitol Hill fight a century ago. Image Louis Brandeis in an undated photo. Credit Hulton Archive/Getty Images After the sudden death of a justice in January 1916, President Woodrow Wilson nominated Louis Brandeis, a onetime corporate lawyer who took up the cause of workers’ rights . Brandeis had a deep interest in the real-world impact of law and his legal briefs were famous for being more loaded with facts and sociology than legal precedents. He helped Wilson come up with his “ New Freedom ” agenda to curb Wall Street excesses when the Democratic candidate was campaigning for president in 1912. Corporate interests and conservative Republicans were opposed to the appointment. Anti-Semitism also played a role, as Brandeis was Jewish. The polarization over Brandeis led the Senate Judiciary Committee for the first time to hold a public hearing as part of the confirmation process. (Judge Garland is also Jewish, although religion is not an issue in the clash over his nomination. Three of the current justices — Ruth Bader Ginsburg, Stephen G. Breyer and Elena Kagan — are Jewish.) Four months after Wilson announced his choice, the Judiciary Committee approved Brandeis, 10 to 8, and the Senate followed , 47 to 22. Justice Brandeis went on to serve for 22 years, and became a towering figure in American jurisprudence. Your Morning Briefing is published weekdays at 6 a.m. Eastern and updated on the web all morning . What would you like to see here? Contact us at briefing@nytimes.com . You can sign up here to get the briefing delivered to your inbox. Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              