   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Common Sense The Junk Bond Rout That Wasn’t Image Carl Icahn, a billionaire activist investor, warned of turmoil in the junk bond market. Credit Karsten Moran for The New York Times By  James B. Stewart Dec. 17, 2015 After seven years of rock-bottom interest rates, it should come as no surprise to see excessive risk taking on Wall Street. Investors have long been trying to identify the next bubble, and last Friday Carl Icahn , the billionaire activist investor, weighed in. The junk bond market, Mr. Icahn said on CNBC , was “a keg of dynamite that sooner or later will blow up.” Then, he looked like he might be onto something. The day before, the Third Avenue Focused Credit Fund, a mutual fund that at its peak had $2.5 billion in junk bonds and distressed securities, said it would halt redemptions and liquidate after suffering large losses. Several junk bond hedge funds also said they were shutting down. Prices of junk bonds — risky corporate debt that pays high interest rates — plunged last Friday on record trading volume and again on Monday. The spread between their yields and those of ultrasafe United States Treasuries surged to nearly 7 percentage points, all signs of stress, if not out-and-out panic. Some commentators called Third Avenue the canary in the mine shaft of the next financial crisis — the next Long-Term Capital Management , the next Bear Stearns , or even the next Reserve Fund — all earlier investment vehicles that imploded and contributed to broad market crises. Image Gary Cohn, president of Goldman Sachs, call the Third Avenue junk bond fund "unique." Credit Yuri Gripas/Reuters But after a few tremors this week, the market for junk bonds (more politely referred to as high-yield debt) stabilized. In recent years, this market has been red hot as investors desperate for higher returns in their bond portfolios piled in. In the wake of Third Avenue’s implosion, no other mutual funds collapsed, and junk bond exchange-traded funds — a particular target of Mr. Icahn’s warnings — handled record volume without any glitch. As investors breathed sighs of relief, stock markets around the globe staged modest recoveries. On Wednesday, when the Federal Reserve finally made its much-anticipated rate increase , markets rose further. In comments after the announcement, Janet L. Yellen, the Fed chairwoman, reassured investors by suggesting the Third Avenue fund’s problems were far from pervasive: “It had many concentrated positions and especially risky and illiquid bonds,” Ms. Yellen said. Junk bond funds rallied. It’s too soon to say the worst is over for investors, or even that the junk bond crisis is over. It took over a year for the earliest signs of serious problems in the mortgage bond market to metastasize into the collapse of Lehman Brothers and a full-blown financial crisis. But in conversations this week with a wide range of investors, Wall Street executives, and economists, no one told me they thought that the Third Avenue fund’s liquidation was likely to set off another crisis. And while bubbles may yet emerge, by their very nature they’re likely to be found somewhere entirely unexpected — not a closely watched, highly liquid market like the $1.3 trillion United States junk bond market. Image Howard Marks, co-chairman of Oaktree Capital Management, worries about excess in the markets, but agreed that the Third Avenue fund was an outlier. Credit Jennifer S. Altman for The New York Times “The Third Avenue situation is unique,” said Gary Cohn, president of Goldman Sachs, who has been in frequent contact with clients throughout the week. “They owned really low-credit-rated products compared to the typical high-yield fund. The long-term impact of rising rates remains a big question mark. But no one thinks that the collapse of Third Avenue is going to contaminate the world.” In part that’s because today’s junk bond market — and the institutions that invest in it — lack two important ingredients of past crises: high leverage (heavy borrowing to finance the purchase of assets) and concentrated bets. While Third Avenue’s portfolio was concentrated in thinly traded, obscure bonds, it had no leverage. Its failure didn’t put any lender in peril, the way the collapse of Lehman Brothers led to crises at A.I.G. and throughout Wall Street. And most junk bond funds, including the two largest high-yield E.T.F.s, also have no leverage and are highly diversified, with hundreds of securities across all industries. Goldman said this week in a note to clients that outside the battered energy sector, “banks are still upbeat about credit quality.” Mark Wiedman, global head of the iShares E.T.F. business at BlackRock, said that the characteristics of E.T.F.s made them far safer than owning individual junk bonds. “The vast majority of E.T.F.s, including all of ours, are unlevered, passive vehicles,” he said. “They’re boring.” Unlike mutual funds, which may need to sell underlying fund positions to meet shareholder redemptions, E.T.F. shares trade like stocks. Last Friday, Blackrock’s flagship junk bond E.T.F., the iShares iBoxx $ High Yield Corporate Bond E.T.F., experienced a surge in trading — $4.3 billion, four times the record daily volume before that week. (On an average day the fund trades about $700 million worth of shares.) On Monday trading hit $3 billion. Video James B. Stewart, on CNBC, discusses why the problems facing the Third Avenue Focused Credit Fund, which said it would halt redemptions and liquidate after suffering large losses, haven't spread across Wall Street. Published On Dec. 18, 2015 Yet “there were zero snafus,” Mr. Wiedman said. “The trading added liquidity. I keep wondering how many stress tests we have to pass.” Mr. Wiedman dismissed comparisons of Third Avenue to Long Term Capital Management, which had to be bailed out in 1998, igniting market turmoil. “LTCM was too big and too levered,” he said. “Third Avenue was small and unlevered. They shut the fund, so there was no forced selling. You can make the case they shouldn’t have been holding so many illiquid assets while offering daily liquidity, but in that regard they were an extreme outlier. This doesn’t reflect any massive problem.” Howard Marks, co-chairman of Oaktree Capital Management, the world’s biggest distressed-debt investor, has also long been warning about excess in the markets. But he agreed that the Third Avenue fund was an outlier. “When you have a fund promising daily liquidity, which owns things that don’t trade and don’t price, you’ve got the ingredients for a meltdown,” Mr. Marks said. “But that means it’s a function of one fund’s management, not a weakness of a whole asset class. I’d be very surprised if it leads to any kind of cataclysm.” Not all financial crises involve high leverage. The Reserve Fund, the money market mutual fund that “broke the buck” after Lehman Brothers collapsed, had no leverage. But its shares, designed to trade at a constant $1 and be the equivalent of cash, fell below $1 because its assets included Lehman debt, which plunged in value. “Reserve breaking the buck was a huge systemic shock,” said Alan Blinder, professor of economics and public policy at Princeton, and author of “After the Music Stopped,” an analysis of the financial crisis. “Events might prove me wrong, but I doubt the analogy holds” with Third Avenue. Image The junk bond market was “a keg of dynamite that sooner or later will blow up,” said Carl Icahn, a billionaire activist investor, on CNBC. Credit Karsten Moran for The New York Times “Third Avenue investors knew they were living in a high-return/high-risk world,” Mr. Blinder said. “Investors in the Reserve Fund thought they were living in a low-return/low- or zero-risk world. So I don’t see Third Avenue as a big shock to the system.” Some investors saw in last week’s junk bond turmoil not the makings of another crisis, but a buying opportunity. Douglas Kass of Seabreeze Partners, a money manager known for his bearish views, said he’s been buying junk bond funds, even ones that use some borrowed money. Third Avenue’s problem was a “liquidity event, not a fundamental event like the other crises,” he said. “I totally reject Carl Icahn’s view that this is a systemic problem. When you see a selling panic like the one that happened last Friday, it usually marks the end of a downturn, not the beginning.” That doesn’t mean, of course, that investors in junk bond and other assets buoyed by years of record-low interest rates won’t lose money. Bond prices drop when interest rates rise, as they have in anticipation of this week’s Fed move, which can hardly be called a surprise. Even so, “lots of people may have gone into high-risk credit funds not fully anticipating or understanding the risk,” Mr. Marks said. Last week “was a wake-up call,” he said. “People went from oblivious to risk to obsessed with risk. I’d say it’s an overreaction, but in many ways it’s a healthy correction in response to some warning signs that have been ignored for years.” Correction :  An earlier version of this column misspelled the surname of an executive at BlackRock. He is Mark Wiedman, not Weidman. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page B 1 of the New York edition with the headline: A Junk Bond Collapse That Hasn’t Materialized . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Related Coverage Junk Bond Fund That Barred Investors Reaches S.E.C. Deal Dec. 16, 2015 Image Junk Bond Fund’s Chief Departs After Blocking Withdrawals Dec. 14, 2015 Image A Junk Bond Fund Freezes Out Investors, and the Chills Spread Dec. 11, 2015 Image Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              