   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Business Day Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Common Sense Dangers of Giving In to Impulse for Revenge Image Michel Gill, left, Kevin Spacey and Sakina Jaffrey in the Netflix show “House of Cards,” about a politician’s quest for vindication. Credit Patrick Harbron for Netflix By  James B. Stewart Jan. 17, 2014 I found the machinations in the Netflix political series “House of Cards” to be immensely entertaining but a little over the top — until, that is, the traffic jam scandal in New Jersey. I was initially perplexed by what appears to have been a ham-handed effort by Gov. Chris Christie’s aides and his appointees at the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey to retaliate against Fort Lee’s mayor, Mark Sokolich, by tying up traffic at the George Washington Bridge, which connects Fort Lee to Manhattan. If retaliation is what it was, it would have worked only if the supposed offender knew he was being punished and why. And if the goal was also to set an example and persuade other local politicians to fall into line, they would have needed to know, too. That’s why criminal trials and sentencing proceedings in this country are public. But once the mayor and other New Jersey politicians realized what was really going on and went to the news media, the result was a scandal that eclipsed any effort at retaliation. Heads have rolled, Mr. Christie’s presumed presidential aspirations have been dealt a potentially fatal blow, and federal prosecutors are digging into the affair for possible crimes. So for the instigators of this scheme, whoever they turn out to be, this was a lose-lose proposition from the start, since there were only two possible outcomes: ■ A traffic jam that harmed a lot of innocent New Jersey residents (including, no doubt, many Christie voters) but otherwise accomplished nothing, or; ■ A major scandal, which is what Mr. Christie got. Ethics, morality and legality aside, why would anyone do this? It’s not as if the Christie scandal is an isolated example. Business lore is filled with instances of ill-advised efforts at retaliation against competitors, suppliers, customers and employees. The courts are currently clogged with cases claiming unlawful retaliation against corporate whistle-blowers and labor organizers. One case reached the Supreme Court this summer. Retaliation is hardly unusual in politics either. The Christie affair reminds me of the I. Lewis Libby scandal, when top White House officials, including Mr. Libby, Vice President Dick Cheney’s top aide, decided to punish Joseph Wilson, a former ambassador critical of the Bush administration’s policies in Iraq, by outing his wife, Valerie Plame, as a covert C.I.A. agent. After the ensuing inept cover-up, Mr. Libby was sentenced to prison in 2007 (though his sentence was commuted by President George W. Bush) and the Bush administration suffered an incalculable loss of credibility. About the only punishment Mr. Wilson suffered was lucrative book and movie deals. And in the world of fiction, there is “House of Cards,” whose plot is set in motion when Representative Frank Underwood decides to retaliate after the president fails to keep his promise to make Mr. Underwood secretary of state. That, too, seems to be blowing up on the congressman (played by Kevin Spacey), although we’ll have to wait for Season 2, which begins next month, to be sure. But these examples of political and corporate retaliation may not be as simple as I assumed. There’s extensive research in economics, political science and philosophy into behavior that is motivated by “observable” as opposed to “verifiable” facts, which may help explain the Christie bridge affair and other dubious instances of retaliation. An “observable” fact is something that people may witness and believe to be true, but cannot prove. Many people seem to have concluded, for example, that Governor Christie instigated the bridge episode. He had the motive, and there is substantial evidence that he ran a tight ship and that his aides would not have freelanced on so delicate and risky a mission. But no one has proved that, and Mr. Christie has flatly denied it. So far it has not been verified. As Randal Picker, a professor at the University of Chicago Law School and co-author of “Game Theory and the Law,” explained to me this week, “If you are a politician with a desire to punish opponents and get away with it, you want to work in the world of observable but not verifiable actions. That would mean that your opponents would understand what you are doing, which is important if you actually want them to obey upfront so that you don’t have to punish them later, but also you want to use a punishment where a third party can’t be sure that you have acted for illegitimate reasons. That way you can get away with it and not pay a legal price for it.” The same could be said of business executives. In the Christie example, that might mean that a relatively small group of political insiders — the mayor of Fort Lee and other local officials — would figure out what was going on and fall into line with the governor’s agenda. But everyone else would be perplexed or indifferent. Mr. Christie seemed to embrace this idea when he initially mocked the suggestion that he might be involved, joking to reporters in December, “I actually was the guy working the cones out there.” He then added, “You really are not serious with that question?” The Libby case and fictional “House of Cards” scheme also depended on the targets figuring it out, but not anyone else, and especially not anyone in the news media. And the retaliation may have served no rational purpose, but may have nonetheless been emotionally satisfying to the perpetrators. Oliver Hart, an economics professor at Harvard and a leading scholar on the role of observable facts, said, “The Christie people were angry with the Fort Lee mayor and possibly wanted to hurt him, even if he never knew why. Basically, if you hurt me, I hurt you back because I am angry (and maybe want to get it out of my system), and this is so even if it has no effect on your future behavior or that of others. An example might be when a waiter spits in the soup of an obnoxious customer. In the behavioral economics literature, this is called negative reciprocity.” In the case that reached the Supreme Court this summer, the University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center withdrew a job offer to Naiel Nassar, a physician of Middle Eastern descent, after he complained that his supervisor discriminated against him because of his ethnicity. (Among other things, the lawsuit said, the supervisor observed, “Middle Easterners are lazy.”) The doctor claimed unlawful retaliation after he lodged a complaint, but the medical center insisted there were other legitimate reasons that he was not asked to stay. A jury sided with Dr. Nassar, but the Supreme Court reversed that decision, saying that the doctor had not proved that unlawful discrimination was the sole basis for his losing his job. In other words, an observable fact (discrimination on the basis of ethnicity) could not be verified. Of course, the outcome might have been different if the doctor was a household name and the case touched off more scrutiny from the news media. “The theory depends on an idea of separated communication: something that is understood by the insiders but not transparent to outsiders,” Professor Picker said. There is no way to know how many people get away with this kind of retaliation, but “it’s a risky game,” said Joseph Badaracco, professor of business ethics at Harvard Business School. “From a management viewpoint, the important thing would be to carefully assess the benefits and the risks. In this case, as we have seen, the risks to Christie’s reputation were significant. So were the possible payoffs really that great? Politicians and others sometimes play hardball, of course, and sometimes they have no choice, but they still have to be prudent about it.” Many forms of retaliation are lawful, even laudable, and can be a powerful motivator. (“Don’t get mad, get even.”) The impulse to retaliate for a perceived wrong seems deeply rooted in human nature. “The idea that people should be held responsible for their actions, and thus might sometimes have to be punished, apart from any good consequences of punishing them, has a pretty distinguished pedigree going back to Immanuel Kant,” said Judith Lichtenberg, a professor of philosophy at Georgetown University and author of an article called “ The Ethics of Retaliation .” “I would say that most people are committed to some version of this idea.” But it’s one thing to cancel meetings with someone who has crossed you, as the mayor of Jersey City now claims Governor Christie did, or to stop taking phone calls, or to snub someone at social events. It’s another to embark on something that may be illegal or unethical and expect to get away with it. The simple lesson from the Christie scandal may be this: When that impulse occurs, whether in politics, business, or daily life, don’t do it. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page B 1 of the New York edition with the headline: Dangers of Giving In to Impulse for Revenge . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              