   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Opinion Supported by Letter Bernie Sanders and Third Parties July 17, 2015 To the Editor: Re “ The Bernie Sanders Moment ” (Sunday Review, July 12): Todd Gitlin’s vivid account of Bernie Sanders’s campaign for the Democratic presidential nomination in 2016 conveys the impression that 1960s-style “radical politics” is now — or at least should be — practiced only within the Democratic Party. Except for Senator Sanders, the only radicals Mr. Gitlin cites with approval are Democrats. He broadly dismisses third-party politics as not “popular on the left” since Ralph Nader ran for president as the Green Party candidate in 2000. But if “radical politics” signifies anything, apart from the “countercultural baggage” to which Mr. Gitlin alludes, surely it includes a willingness to challenge existing power structures, including the two major political parties. That’s what the progressives thought who first championed the abolition of slavery, women’s suffrage, the minimum wage, a progressive income tax, the 40-hour workweek and many other reforms that originated with third parties. Mr. Nader’s presidential campaigns carried on that tradition by advancing a platform that Democrats wouldn’t touch. It included, for example, cracking down on corporate crime, supporting single-payer health care and opposing the war in Iraq. OLIVER B. HALL Washington The writer, the founder and legal counsel of the Center for Competitive Democracy, represents Ralph Nader in private practice. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page A 26 of the New York edition with the headline: Sanders and Third Parties . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              