   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Media Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Now That ‘Sugar Man’ Is Found, Lawsuit Focuses on Missing Royalties By  Ben Sisario May 2, 2014 Image The musician Rodriguez, whose story was told in the documentary "Searching for Sugar Man." Credit Kevin Winter/Getty Images The documentary “ Searching for Sugar Man ” tells the story of Rodriguez, an obscure singer-songwriter from Detroit whose albums were commercial flops when released in the early 1970s, but — unknown to Rodriguez and everyone around him — later became gigantic hits in South Africa. One of the most intriguing questions raised by the film, which was released in 2012 and won an Academy Award, was why the singer never received the proper royalties for an estimated half-million album sales in South Africa. That question is still not resolved, but a lawsuit filed on Friday involving two Detroit music executives who had worked with Rodriguez could provide some answers. The case, which is being heard in Federal District Court in Detroit, concerns the songwriting rights on Rodriguez’s first two albums, “Cold Fact” (1970) and “Coming From Reality” (1971). In the suit, the producer Harry Balk contends that he signed Rodriguez — whose full name is Sixto Rodriguez — to a five-year songwriting contract starting in 1966, but that when the singer made those albums, his new producer, Clarence Avant, had Rodriguez use a false songwriting name to circumvent the agreement. The name those early albums gave as the author of most songs was Jesus Rodriguez, “purportedly Sixto Rodriguez’s brother,” the suit contends. Mr. Balk’s company, Gomba Music, accuses Mr. Avant and his company, Interior Music, of copyright infringement, fraud and tortious interference with the 1966 contract, and seeks unspecific damages. Rodriguez himself is not a party to the suit. The existence of the lawsuit was first reported by The Hollywood Reporter . Mr. Balk and Mr. Avant are well-known executives in the world of soul and R&B music, and both had associations with Motown at different times. Mr. Balk, who produced Rodriguez’s first single in 1967, worked as a creative director at Motown in the late 1960s and early 1970s. Mr. Avant, an entrepreneur whose labels included Sussex and Venture, was chairman of Motown in the 1990s. Mr. Avant did not respond to a voice mail message left at his Los Angeles office on Friday. What the case means for Rodriguez himself is unclear. Since the film was released, he has gone on to tour in major arenas and festivals, selling hundreds of thousands of reissued copies of his albums. But his own share of the royalties from the South African sales has not been resolved. Rodriguez’s lawyer, Mark A. Levinsohn, said on Friday that his client was “still keenly interested in finding out what happened all those years ago and where the money went.” Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              