   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Middle East Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Joint Chiefs Chairman Arrives in Iraq to Assess Fight Against ISIS Image Gen. Joseph F. Dunford Jr., chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, spoke to journalists while flying to Erbil, Iraq, on Tuesday. Credit D. Myles Cullen/Pentagon, via Associated Press By  Michael R. Gordon Oct. 20, 2015 BAGHDAD — The top American military officer, Gen. Joseph F. Dunford Jr., arrived here on Tuesday to take stock of the campaign against the Islamic State, as Iraq and the American-led coalition are trying to regain the initiative and territory from the militants. It was the first overseas trip for General Dunford since he took over this month as chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. General Dunford conferred with Lt. Gen. Sean B. MacFarland, who last month became the commander of the international coalition’s effort in Iraq and Syria. He also met with Khaled al-Obeidi, Iraq’s defense minister, and Haider al-Abadi, Iraq’s prime minister. The American-led coalition is putting pressure on the militants on several fronts. Backed by American air power, Iraqi forces are on the outskirts of Ramadi, which was taken by the militants in May. Iraqi forces and Shiite militias captured the Baiji oil refinery, north of Baghdad, on Friday and are trying to expand the territory under their control there. On Tuesday, the Iraqi military said it had secured the nearby town of Baiji after days of fighting. Clashes are also taking place in the Sinjar region, in northwest Iraq, between Kurdish forces and the Islamic State, also known as ISIS and ISIL. And the American military said last week that it had parachuted ammunition to Syrian Arab fighters in northeast Syria, with a goal of having the Arab fighters join a larger body of Kurdish forces advancing toward Raqqa, the Islamic State’s capital in Syria. Where ISIS Has Directed and Inspired Attacks Around the World More than a dozen countries have had attacks since the Islamic State, or ISIS, began to pursue a global strategy in the summer of 2014. June 17, 2015 “We are trying to fight him throughout the depth and breadth of the battlefield in Iraq and Syria,” General MacFarland said in an interview Sunday, referring to fighters for the Islamic State. One of General Dunford’s aims was to review the effort to train and equip the Iraqi Army, which has lagged behind goals set last year. The original objective was to train 12 brigades, but the readjusted goal is eight: six Iraqi Army brigades and two Kurdish brigades. As the United States and its allies are trying to improve the training of Iraqi troops, the Iraqi government has become dependent on Iranian-backed Shiite militias, many of which are participating in the operations in and around Baiji. Baghdad was the second stop in Iraq for General Dunford, who commanded a Marine Corps regiment during the 2003 invasion of Iraq that toppled Saddam Hussein. On Tuesday morning, he arrived in Erbil, where he met with President Massoud Barzani, the president of the Kurdish regional government, and other senior Kurdish officials. The United States carried out airstrikes in 2014 to prevent the Islamic State from moving on Erbil after Mosul was captured by the militants in June of that year. It is supporting Kurdish pesh merga fighters with advisers and airstrikes. Several hundred troops from Italy, Norway, Britain, Germany, Finland, the Netherlands and Hungary are also training Kurdish forces. General Dunford arrived here after talks in Israel and Jordan. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page A 11 of the New York edition with the headline: Top U.S. General Arrives in Iraq to Assess Fight . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Related Coverage New Role for General After Failure of Syria Rebel Plan Oct. 19, 2015 Image U.S. and Iraqi Forces Take Offensive Against ISIS on Several Fronts Oct. 19, 2015 Image Iraqi Forces and Shiite Militias Retake Oil Refinery From ISIS Oct. 16, 2015 Image Show All Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              