   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Economic View The Tax Code Can Be Simpler. But Not Three Pages. Image Credit Raymond Biesinger By  Josh Barro Nov. 13, 2015 All the Republican presidential candidates say they want to make the tax code simpler. But no candidate has been more aggressive about simplicity than Carly Fiorina, who says “our tax code needs to go from 73,000 pages down to about three pages.” To be clear, Mrs. Fiorina is not calling for a three-page tax return . She is saying the entire tax law of the federal government — and apparently the accompanying regulations, since the Internal Revenue Code itself is 3,728 pages — should be just a little longer than this article. On Tuesday, she pointed on Facebook to one way she thinks that could be done: by putting in place a tax plan proposed by the economists Robert Hall and Alvin Rabushka, who have produced draft legislation for a single-rate income tax that runs just 1,120 words. “Reporters said it wasn’t possible,” wrote Sarah Isgur Flores, Mrs. Fiorina’s deputy campaign manager, on Twitter. “Once again, media was wrong.” Actually, Mrs. Fiorina is wrong. The Hall-Rabushka legislation is intended to replace not the entire Internal Revenue Code but just Subtitle A, which lays out rules about how much tax is due on what income. That would still leave Subtitles B through K, a further 1,445 pages describing taxes other than the income tax, and setting out important administrative matters like what happens if you don’t pay your taxes. Those pages would need to be retained or replaced with new law, unless Mrs. Fiorina wants the Internal Revenue Service to make up its own rules. Even replacing just Subtitle A with the three-page Hall-Rabushka version could cause significant problems. ”The minute it’s passed, I’m going to call my dean and tell her to pay me only in goods,” said Michael J. Graetz, a tax professor at Columbia Law School. “Buy me a house, buy me some groceries every week, buy me meals.” That’s because the three-page plan avoids complex rules about fringe benefits by saying noncash compensation is tax-free. That said, while the tax code can’t be reduced to three pages, it could be significantly simpler than it is today, and Mrs. Fiorina and most of her opponents have identified a source of both length and complexity: so-called tax preferences. When a provision of the tax code says one thing will be taxed and another thing will not, taxpayers are encouraged to contort their lives to do more of the untaxed thing and less of the taxed thing, paying lawyers and accountants to keep the records along the way. “In my case, I have lawyers all over the place, I have accounting firms all over the place,” Donald Trump said in August. Like all of his opponents, Mr. Trump says he would simplify the tax code by lowering tax rates and cutting the number of deductions and preferences offered. Unlike his opponents, he says his simplification would be so effective as to “put H&R Block out of business, knock ’em out, put ’em out of business.” But the candidates have missed the mark in a few ways. One is by conflating tax simplicity with the number of tax rates imposed by the I.R.S. “Simplify the income tax system to just three individual income tax rates, instead of the current six,” urges Gov. Chris Christie’s tax plan , although the actual number of tax brackets is seven . But having too many tax brackets is not why it’s hard to do taxes. Once you know what your taxable income is, applying the right tax rates is simple arithmetic that tax software will do for you. If you make less than $100,000, you don’t even need to do arithmetic; you can read your tax liability on the convenient tax tables published by the I.R.S. What make taxes complex are all the rules that determine your taxable income in the first place. The candidates’ plans would simplify the taxable income calculation, but they have been hesitant to make this calculation too simple for a reason: That would require taking away tax deductions, and people tend to like the deductions they take. Most Republican candidates, including Mr. Trump, have said their plans to attack tax preferences would not touch two of the biggest and most popular ones: deductions for home mortgage interest and charitable giving. So far, the candidate most committed to tax simplification may be Ben Carson, who advocated abolishing the deduction for charitable giving at Tuesday’s debate. Senators Ted Cruz and Rand Paul have also proposed simple tax plans that would not only shrink the personal income tax and repeal most deductions but also abolish payroll taxes and the corporate income tax, replacing them with a value-added tax, which is kind of like a national sales tax. In other countries, VATs tend to be quite complex, with different rates for different kinds of transactions and with many industries (like health care and education) exempted. But the VATs conceived by Mr. Paul and Mr. Cruz are supposed to apply broadly and equally across the whole economy, which would make them easy for businesses to comply with, and would also mean they could raise a lot of revenue, far outstripping the income tax. Other candidates’ plans are not so simple. Senator Marco Rubio and Mr. Trump would both introduce a significant new source of complexity by taxing small-business profits at a lower rate than wage income; currently, they are taxed at the same rate. This change would encourage taxpayers to find ways to recharacterize their income as profits instead of wages, perhaps by becoming independent contractors. It would also require the I.R.S. to issue new rules about what is a wage and what is a profit, complicating life for people who have bona fide business income. There is also one approach to simplification that hasn’t been proposed by any of the Republican candidates: having the I.R.S. complete most people’s tax returns for them, requiring changes only if there is an error. This is already done in countries like Denmark and Spain. Tax complexity isn’t about just how many rules there are, but also about how many of those rules taxpayers actually have to confront. Auto-completion of tax forms would reduce complexity (and time and cost) as experienced by real people. One challenge with such a system is that tax returns depend not just on information known to the I.R.S. — such as the wages your employer reports on form W-2 — but on information it may not know, like your charitable giving. But if the tax code were simpler, with fewer deductions, it would be possible for the government to prepare an accurate, completed return for a greater share of tax filers. A change like that, along with simpler tax rules, might really put H&R Block out of business. Doris Burke contributed research.  The Upshot provides news, analysis and graphics about politics, policy and everyday life. Follow us on Facebook and Twitter . Sign up for our newsletter. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page BU 6 of the New York edition with the headline: A Three-Page Tax Code: Not Exactly Simple . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              