   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by The Ethicist Must a Quaker School Care for Its Neighbors? By  Kwame Anthony Appiah Oct. 28, 2015 Image Credit Illustration by Tomi Um A wealthy private school that espouses Quaker values is buying property contiguous to its main campus. On that land is a hospice center and home for Medicaid recipients; residents were reportedly given about 15 months to relocate. Some said they had nowhere to go and were very distressed at the prospect of moving. The facility has apparently been in poor financial condition and was forced to sell. Discussing this story, my friends and I agreed that the school acted in keeping with its educational mission and that the facility’s owners appear to have had little choice. However, a heated discussion ensued as to the ethical obligations of the buyer and the seller with regard to facilitating a harm-free transition for the residents. Some felt that the onus falls entirely on the seller. Others felt that the school should share in smoothing the potential disruption to these people’s lives. What do you think? Name Withheld ‘‘Supererogatory’’ is the marvelously Latinate adjective that philosophers favor for acts that go above and beyond what morality requires. Let’s see if this notion helps explain the dissonance you report. Here, the beleaguered residents seem to be victims of a troubled enterprise. There’s no reason to think the new owners of the property aren’t entitled to do what they’re doing. Case closed? Not quite. An educational nonprofit that is explicitly committed to Quaker values might be expected to think about this question within the framework of its distinctive ideals. And those surely include recognizing the worth of doing more than you are obliged to do. The primary duty of the school’s trustees is to run the place as a successful educational institution. This limits what they can responsibly spend for things beyond their remit. But if the institution is wealthy, it has greater latitude. Part of the school’s mission involves teaching certain precepts, and concern for ‘‘the least of these’’ is surely among them. There might even be opportunities for students to play a role in the lives of the residents and to learn about aging and death. Either way, the school might see some educational value in teaching respect for acts of supererogation. Who knows? Maybe it is already planning to do all these things. An elderly neighbor ran a stop sign in our village as I was driving through the intersection. Fortunately, she was going only 5 miles per hour, otherwise she could have inflicted grievous bodily harm, because she plowed right into the driver’s door. Of course, she accepted blame for the accident. (‘‘My foot was stuck on the gas pedal’’ was her explanation.) And naturally, her insurance company paid for the damage. Given the number of dents in her car, I assumed the company would probably refuse to insure her after that. I hoped she would give up driving. Whether or not the company took away her insurance, my neighbor neither sold nor retired her vehicle. A few months after the accident, I saw her car in our village and later that same day saw it parked in her driveway. Do I have an obligation to call the Department of Motor Vehicles, tell it about the accident and ask that my neighbor be submitted to a driving test? What if a child happens to walk across a street and that same neighbor runs a stop sign? If I don’t report her, won’t I be in some way complicit in that child’s injury, or worse? I was on the verge of calling the D.M.V., but then I asked myself: How would I feel about taking away my neighbor’s mobility in a rural area with no real public transportation? Shouldn’t that be the responsibility of a relative, friend or physician? Do I really want to act as our village policeman? Paul M. Coopersmith, Marin County, Calif. Some states — yours is one of them — allow residents to fill out a form, asking, confidentially, that a re-­evaluation be given to someone who they believe may not be a safe driver. Assuming that your neighbor is still driving, your D.M.V. may have a competent expert assess her driving ability. If she is deemed unqualified to drive, you will have saved both her and others from the risk of serious harm. She won’t be grateful, of course, and you’re right that it would be better if someone closer to her intervened. Still, if she does have friends or relatives in the area and she loses her license, they’ll be able to step in to help. If she’s alone, you can hope, not unreasonably, that someone who can afford to keep and insure a car can afford the occasional taxi. And there may be organizations that help people in her situation with travel. You could look into this and mail her some information about the options. That would be a generous act of supererogation. We have friends who are fairly well off. The husband is an entrepreneur and likes to talk about how much money he makes. Sadly, their son was just found to have a treatable cancer. Despite having insurance and an annual out-­of-­pocket cap that can’t be more than $13,000, they have started an online fund-­raising page and are having multiple fund-­raising events to pay their son’s medical expenses. Within a few short weeks, they have raised nearly $30,000. Is asking people for money to pay for your or your child’s medical care ethical if (a) you could pay for it with little sacrifice and (b) you may raise more money than the care costs you? Name Withheld In the United States, almost no one thinks he’s rich enough. Some fantastically wealthy folks may believe they have sufficient resources, but they usually don’t draw their good fortune to other people’s attention. (O.K., there’s Donald Trump and the Kardashians.) People who make much of the fact that they’re well off are sometimes fronting: They’re not doing as well as they want you to think. If that’s what’s going on here, what your friend is doing isn’t so awful. What’s awful is that we live in a country where many people, even those with health insurance, are thrown into financial crisis by a medical emergency. There are plenty of countries where this situation couldn’t arise. Let’s suppose, though, that you’re right, and your friend is not facing a financial emergency. When I see people raising money for medical expenses online, I assume they can pay their bills only with great sacrifice or can’t afford treatment at all. I certainly don’t suppose the money they raise is going to leave them better off than they were before! So, if the situation is as you think, I’ll confirm your suspicion: Your friend is receiving charity under false pretenses. That’s especially shameful because he’s taking advantage of people who are inclined toward ... yes, supererogation. Kwame Anthony Appiah teaches philosophy at N.Y.U. and is the magazine’s Ethicist columnist. He is the author of  ‘‘Cosmopolitanism’’ and ‘‘The Honor Code: How Moral Revolutions Happen.’’  To submit a query: Send an email to ethicist@nytimes.com; or send mail to The Ethicist, The New York Times Magazine, 620 Eighth Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10018. (Include a daytime phone number.)  Sign up for our newsletter to get the best of The New York Times Magazine delivered to your inbox every week. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page 26 of the Sunday Magazine with the headline: Must a Quaker School Care for Its Neighbors? . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              