   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Movies Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Holiday Releases: Dinosaurs, Divas, Archers and Tie Fighters Image Clockwise from top: Arlo the apatosaurus and friend in Disney/Pixar’s “The Good Dinosaur.”; Helen Mirren and Bryan Cranston in “Trumbo.”; Elizabeth Banks and Jennifer Lawrence in “The Hunger Games: Mockingjay Part 2.” Credit Disney/Pixar; Hilary Bronwyn Gayle/Bleecker Street; Murray Close/Lionsgate By  Anita Gates Oct. 30, 2015 A guide to notable openings through the end of the year, the cutoff for Oscar elegibility. All dates are subject to change. November Nov. 4 BROOKLYN Saoirse Ronan stars as a young Irish immigrant beginning a new life in 1950s New York. From the pen of Nick Hornby, based on the novel by Colm Toibin. John Crowley directed a cast that also includes Domhnall Gleeson and Julie Walters. IN JACKSON HEIGHTS Frederick Wiseman, the grand old man of documentary film, is still hard at work at 85. His newest is a portrait of a vibrant, wildly diverse Queens neighborhood where 167 languages are believed to be spoken and immigration is often a priority topic. Nov. 6 CODEGIRL Apps are now a $77 billion business, and 80 percent of them are created by men. In Lesley Chilcott’s documentary, teams of teenage girls from the United States, Brazil, India and Nigeria try to change that; they go up against one another in an app-development competition. THE CONDEMNED 2 The wrestling champion Randy Orton plays a bounty hunter who tries to capture the leader of an evil gambling ring but fails and ends up as a human target in one of the man’s hunts. Rich people bet on whether he’ll survive. With Eric Roberts and Wes Studi. Directed by Roel Reine. FRIENDS AND ROMANS So an Italian-American actor (Michael Rispoli) who’s sick of being cast as a mobster gathers some of his Staten Island pals, and they set out to stage “Julius Caesar.” The feds notice the actors gathering at odd hours and conclude that they’re real-life mobsters. (To be fair to the feds, many in the cast — including Mr. Rispoli, Annabella Sciorra, Tony Sirico, Anthony DeSando and Tony Darrow — were on “The Sopranos.”) Christopher Kublan, the film’s director, plays Joey Two Chins. THE HALLOW Silly London conservationist! If you and your family move into that secluded forest in rural Ireland, you’ll just awaken an ancient evil — cursed creatures who prey on the lost. Any one of the superstitious villagers nearby could have told you. Corin Hardy directed this fantasy horror tale. THE HOUSE THAT JACK BUILT In Henry Barrial’s drama, a man buys an apartment building in the Bronx and moves his whole family in. The cast includes E. J. Bonilla and Melissa Fumero. IN THE BASEMENT From the Austrian director Ulrich Seidl, a documentary about what people do with and in their basements. For some, snakes, trumpets, nudity and photographs of Hitler are involved. LOST IN THE SUN Josh Duhamel and Josh Wiggins star in this road-trip drama about a small-time crook, his new pal (an orphaned teenager), a string of robberies and male bonding. Trey Nelson wrote and directed. MISS YOU ALREADY Drew Barrymore and Toni Collette star in Catherine Hardwicke’s drama about best friends and what happens when one of them receives a life-altering diagnosis. Well, it’s been 27 years since “Beaches.” With Dominic Cooper and Paddy Considine. THE NIGHTINGALE A grandfather and a granddaughter’s journey through rural China with a pet bird. Philippe Muyl’s film contrasts big-city Beijing and a pastoral village. PALIO And we’re off to the Piazza del Campo. For tourists who’ve never made it to Siena, Italy, at the right time of year, or for those who have and want to relive the city’s most famous event, this documentary focuses on the Palio, the world’s oldest horse race (the “modern” versions started in 1656). The director, Cosima Spender, focuses on Gigi Bruschelli, who has won 13 races, and Giovanni Atzeni, his young protégé turned rival. THE PEANUTS MOVIE Looks as if Snoopy the beagle is the character who’s going to have the most fun with computer animation in the big-screen 3-D debut of Charles M. Schulz’s adored “Peanuts” characters. Snoopy is in World War I flying ace mode, with aerial stunts to show off. Meanwhile his hapless young owner, Charlie Brown, goes on a winter quest of his own. Steve Martino directed. SEMBÈNE! A Senegalese-American documentary about Ousmane Sembène (1923-2007), known as the father of African cinema. His films tended to be heavily political and helped create a new vision of Africa. Samba Gadjigo and Jason Silverman directed. SPECTRE Nine years have passed since Daniel Craig took over as James Bond, in “Casino Royale,” and this is his fourth film as 007. The settings are Mexico City, London and Rome. The women with sexy looks and European accents include a criminal’s widow (Monica Bellucci) and an assassin’s daughter (Léa Seydoux). Ralph Fiennes is M; Ben Whishaw is Q; Naomie Harris is Moneypenny; and Christoph Waltz is the villain du jour, who runs a previously secret organization known as Spectre and has a connection to Bond that Bond has never known about. SPOTLIGHT Michael Keaton, Mark Ruffalo, Liev Schreiber, Rachel McAdams and Brian d’Arcy James play reporters and editors from The Boston Globe who discovered and exposed a citywide conspiracy to cover up the sexual abuse of children by Roman Catholic priests there. Tom McCarthy directed. THEEB A coming-of-age drama filmed in Jordan. In 1916, a Bedouin man is asked to guide a British Army officer on a dangerous journey, and his little brother (Jacir Eid) follows them. Naji Abu Nowar wrote and directed. TRUMBO Bryan Cranston as an intense real-life character: Dalton Trumbo, the Hollywood screenwriter who was blacklisted as part of the McCarthy-era Communist witch hunt. Helen Mirren plays the über-powerful gossip columnist Hedda Hopper, who is not on his side. With Diane Lane, Elle Fanning and John Goodman. Jay Roach directed. WHAT OUR FATHERS DID: A NAZI LEGACY Philippe Sands, an international human rights lawyer whose family was killed by the Nazis, wrote and appears in this documentary from David Evans. The subjects are two men whose fathers were high-ranking Nazi officials and who have glaringly different attitudes toward them. WRECKER Worst thing that can happen to two spirited young women on a road trip? It’s a tie between the plot of “Thelma & Louise” and being chased by a psychotic tow-truck driver, which is what happens in Michael Bafaro’s action horror thriller, starring Anna Hutchison and Drea Whitburn. They were just trying to get to a music festival. Nov. 12 MADAME PHUNG’S LAST JOURNEY Tham Nguyen Thi’s cinéma vérité documentary is about a former female monk who becomes den mother to a group of traveling Vietnamese performers, most of them transgender Nov. 13 BY THE SEA She’s billed as Angelina Jolie Pitt this time, as the director, writer and co-star — with her husband, Brad Pitt — of this 1970s love story set at a quiet seaside resort in France. Ms. Jolie Pitt and Mr. Pitt play an American couple in a troubled marriage who learn a lot from the people they meet on vacation (like Mélanie Laurent and Niels Arestrup). CONDEMNED A rich Manhattan girl moves in with her poor boyfriend on the Lower East Side, and things are so filthy and toxic that everybody in the building turns into killing monsters. A virus does it. Dylan Penn (Sean Penn and Robin Wright’s daughter) and Ronen Rubinstein star. Eli Morgan Gesner wrote and directed this horror story. ENTERTAINMENT At Sundance, Variety called Rick Alverson’s new film “weird, unsettling” and “an odyssey through a soulless American nowhere.” The publicity people call it both a comedy and a “hallucinatory fugue.” Gregg Turkington (better known as Neil Hamburger) stars as an aging small-time comedian with a terrible comb-over who has odd encounters as he tours third-rate clubs and tries to reach his estranged daughter. With Tye Sheridan and John C. Reilly. THE HEIST What ever happened to getaway cars? In Scott Mann’s film, two would-be casino robbers are forced to hijack a city bus and take all the passengers hostage. Starring Robert De Niro (as the casino owner), Jeffrey Dean Morgan, Dave Bautista and Morris Chestnut. INGRID BERGMAN — IN HER OWN WORDS We’ll always have Ingrid, through her roles in films like “Casablanca” — and the three for which she won Oscars: “Gaslight,” “Anastasia” and “Murder on the Orient Express.” Bergman would have turned 100 this year. Her children, Isabella and Roberto Rossellini and Pia Lindstrom, appear in this documentary, replete with home movies and private letters. Directed by Stig Bjorkman and narrated by Alicia Vikander, fellow Swedes. JAMES WHITE Josh Mond won the Best of Next award at Sundance for this drama about a hard-partying, self-destructive 20-something New Yorker trying to keep it together while his mother battles cancer. Christopher Abbott (“Girls”) plays the title role, and Cynthia Nixon is his mom. LOVE THE COOPERS A Christmas Eve get-together: Olivia Wilde, Alan Arkin, John Goodman, Diane Keaton, Anthony Mackie, Amanda Seyfried and Marisa Tomei are among the stars of this four-generation family tale, directed by Jessie Nelson. MIA MADRE Nanni Moretti (whose last feature was “We Have a Pope”) appears in his own film, but Margherita Buy plays the busy Italian filmmaker at the center of the story. She is a director torn between a complicated film shoot, a temperamental American movie star (John Turturro), the illness of her mother and the challenges of raising a teenage daughter. The Holiday Movie Season in Trailers From Oscar hopefuls to blockbuster franchises, a look at select trailers from movies in theaters this season that may fit your holiday mood. Nov. 26, 2015 MY ALL AMERICAN Finn Wittrock stars in the true story of Freddie Steinmark, a boy who was always too small to play football but refused to accept defeat. Then an injury revealed shocking medical news. With Sarah Bolger as his high school sweetheart and Aaron Eckhart as Darrell Royal, the University of Texas coach. Angelo Pizzo directed this biodrama. SHELTER Two homeless people from very different backgrounds meet on the streets of New York and fall in love. Jennifer Connelly and Anthony Mackie star. Paul Bettany makes his directing and screenwriting debut. SONG OF LAHORE The Sachal Jazz Ensemble, from Pakistan, stars in this concert documentary. Part of a group determined to bring back the country’s traditional music, these ensemble musicians make their mark with an album that fuses South Asian instruments and jazz. And Wynton Marsalis invites them to New York to perform with the Jazz at Lincoln Center Orchestra. Sharmeen Obaid-Chinoy and Andy Schocken directed. STEVE McQUEEN: THE MAN & LE MANS McQueen, who died in 1980, invented a new kind of movie-star cool in films like “The Thomas Crown Affair” and “Bullitt.” This documentary focuses on his love for auto racing and his doomed attempt to make a film about the classic French race Le Mans. Gabriel Clarke and John McKenna directed. THE 33 “The Chilean Miners” might have been a better title, but 33 was indeed the number of men who were buried alive in 2010 after a gold and copper mine in Chile collapsed. As time passed — over two months — people around the globe watched, rescue crews worked carefully and few observers expected a happy ending. Antonio Banderas, James Brolin, Lou Diamond Phillips and Rodrigo Santoro star in this drama, directed by Patricia Riggen, which follows the events above ground and below. Nov. 18 DEMOCRATS Political cinéma vérité. Camilla Nielsson’s three-year look inside the political process in Zimbabwe was named best documentary feature at the Tribeca Film Festival this year. Nov. 20 CAROL Women in love (with each other) in 1950s New York, via a 1952 Patricia Highsmith novel (“The Price of Salt”). Cate Blanchett is an elegant married woman, and Rooney Mara is a young department store clerk with whom she has an affair. Kyle Chandler plays the husband left behind; Sarah Paulson is the best friend. And when the two new lovers go traveling, it turns into a road movie. Directed by Todd Haynes, who previously visited the gay ’50s with “Far From Heaven.” When “Carol” was at Cannes this year, Ms. Mara tied for best actress (with Emmanuelle Bercot for “Mon Roi”), and Manohla Dargis described it in The Times as a “visually arresting, transporting film.” CENSORED VOICES Right after the Six Day War in 1967, a group of young kibbutzniks recorded conversations with soldiers just home from the battlefield. The Israeli Army censored the recordings; now Mor Loushy’s documentary reveals them. CRIMINAL ACTIVITIES There are so many ways to get into trouble with the mob. John Travolta stars in this thriller about a group of old friends who do it by taking advantage of an inside stock tip. With Dan Stevens, Michael Pitt and Christopher Abbott. Jackie Earle Haley directed. FRAME BY FRAME A documentary about four Afghani photojournalists, including footage shot in secret when the Taliban were in power. Alexandria Bombach and Mo Scarpelli directed. #HORROR Oh dear, Chloë Sevigny is 40. She’s starring in a horror drama about teenage girls, and she’s one of the moms. In this, Tara Subkoff’s directorial debut, six privileged young women get carried away with a social media game and cyberbullying. The cast also includes Natasha Lyonne and Taryn Manning. THE HUNGER GAMES: MOCKINGJAY PART 2 President Snow (Donald Sutherland) had better watch his back. In this fourth and final “Hunger Games” film, Jennifer Lawrence returns as Katniss Everdeen, now preparing for the final showdown. Francis Lawrence directed a cast that includes Liam Hemsworth, Josh Hutcherson, Sam Claflin, Woody Harrelson, Elizabeth Banks, Jeffrey Wright, Jena Malone and Stanley Tucci. And because this was filmed at the same time as “Mockingjay — Part 1,” Philip Seymour Hoffman appears, almost two years after his death, as Plutarch Heavensbee, head game maker and rebel leader. KINGDOM OF SHADOWS Since 2007, an estimated 23,000 people have disappeared in Mexico. Bernardo Ruiz’s documentary — which focuses on a nun, a Texas rancher and a Homeland Security officer — explores the root causes of the drug war behind this loss. LEGEND Ah, the Kray twins, London’s notorious midcentury gangsters and swinging ’60s nightclub owners. Tom Hardy plays them both (and one of them was kind of psychotic) in this crime drama written and directed by Brian Helgeland. With David Thewlis, Emily Browning and Chazz Palminteri. MUSTANG Talk about being grounded! In this drama from Turkey, which was well reviewed at Cannes, five teenage sisters splash about on the beach one day with some male classmates. The village is scandalized, and the girls are basically imprisoned at home, yanked out of school and prepped to be quickly married off. They bond and rebel. Deniz Gamze Erguven directed. SECRET IN THEIR EYES Julia Roberts, Nicole Kidman and Chiwetel Ejiofor in cold-case territory. A thriller about a young girl’s murder and the F.B.I. investigators who finally uncover a new lead 13 years later. Written and directed by Billy Ray. The original picture, from Argentina, won the 2010 best foreign-language film Oscar. SWEET MICKY FOR PRESIDENT After the earthquake in Haiti, the rapper Pras Michel of the Fugees wanted to help. He ended up running a presidential campaign there for Michel Martelly (a.k.a. Sweet Micky), a Haitian pop star. Directed by Ben Patterson, the film won two documentary prizes at Slamdance. VERY SEMI-SERIOUS: A PARTIALLY THOROUGH PORTRAIT OF NEW YORKER CARTOONISTS Yes, there is a real Roz Chast, and she appears in this documentary about the 90-year-old sociosatirical phenomenon known as the New Yorker cartoon. Here are the people who create them, those who choose them and what the whole thing may mean. With Bob Mankoff, David Remnick, talking dogs, overachieving urbanites and bipolar bears. WE ARE TWISTED _______ SISTER! Andrew Horn’s documentary looks back at the most amazing bar band in the world, even when it was playing every borough, making $10,000 a night (way back when) and unable to get a record deal. Nov. 25 BIKES VS. CARS Fredrik Gertten would love to see the streets of New York and pretty much every big city filled with bicycles (and a lot fewer cars). His documentary positions itself as an environmentally friendly new approach to urban planning. CREED Rocky Balboa is an old guy now, but he’s still brimming with wisdom for young boxers. This time, the kid (played by Michael B. Jordan) has a secret: His father was Apollo Creed, the long-ago heavyweight champion whose challenge changed Rocky’s life. In what amounts to the seventh “Rocky” movie, training ensues. Ryan Coogler (“Fruitvale Station”) directed. THE GOOD DINOSAUR Disney and Pixar ask the cosmic question: What if a certain asteroid had missed Earth a few million years ago, and dinosaurs had never become extinct? Maybe a nice young Apatosaurus named Arlo (the voice of 13-year-old Raymond Ochoa) would have become friends with a human and learned to confront his fears and get all self-actualized. Peter Sohn directed this animated adventure. The voice cast also includes Jeffrey Wright, Frances McDormand, Steve Zahn and Sam Elliott. THE NIGHT BEFORE A comedy about three young men who are getting too old to act like debauched jerks at their annual Christmas Eve get-together. Joseph Gordon-Levitt, Seth Rogen (in a Star of David holiday sweater) and Anthony Mackie play the friends searching for New York’s biggest, baddest holiday party: the Nutcracka Ball. Jonathan Levine directed. VICTOR FRANKENSTEIN Never thought of Daniel Radcliffe as Igor, the mad scientist Victor Frankenstein’s assistant, but here he is in a drama told from Igor’s point of view and directed by Paul McGuigan. James McAvoy stars as Victor, who as in other retellings, goes too far and creates a homicidal monster. Nov. 27 THE DANISH GIRL Eddie Redmayne, last year’s Oscar winner for “The Theory of Everything,” and Alicia Vikander (“Ex Machina”) star in a drama about the artists Einar and Gerda Wegener, who met as students in Copenhagen, married in 1904 and were still together in 1930 when Einar became one of the first known men to have sex reassignment surgery. It was in Germany, and she made a new life under the name Lili Elbe. Tom Hooper (“The King’s Speech”) directed. JANIS: LITTLE GIRL BLUE A charter member of rock’s died-at-27 club (in 1970), Janis Joplin left an indelible mark with hits like “Piece of My Heart” and “Me and Bobby McGee” — and her own complex personality. Amy Berg’s documentary tells Joplin’s story partly through letters she wrote to her parents in Texas over the years. KILLING THEM SAFELY The story of the Taser, the much-debated electroshock weapon that disrupts voluntary muscle control, and Rick and Tom Smith, the brothers who invented it. This documentary includes interviews with police officers, lawyers and at least one electrophysiologist. Nick Berardini directed. THE SUMMER OF SANGAILE A romantic drama from Lithuania. Sangaile (Julija Steponaityte), a 17-year-old girl, wants to be a stunt pilot but is afraid of heights. A romance with a local girl (Aiste Dirziute) she meets at an aviation show may teach her how to be daring in all kinds of ways. Alanté Kavaïté wrote and directed. Image Clockwise from top left: Tim Roth, Kurt Russell and Jennifer Jason Leigh in “The Hateful Eight.”; Will Smith in “Concussion.”; Leonardo DiCaprio in “The Revenant.”; Chris Hemsworth in “In the Heart of the Sea.” Credit Clockwise from top left: Andrew Cooper/The Weinstein Company; Melinda Sue Gordon/Columbia Pictures; Kimberley French/20th Century Fox; Jonathan Prime/Warner Bros. Pictures December Dec. 2 HITCHCOCK/TRUFFAUT In 1962, Alfred Hitchcock and François Truffaut sat down in a Hollywood office and chatted — for days — about film. Their talk became Truffaut’s 1966 book, “Cinema According to Hitchcock.” Kent Jones’s documentary reflects on the conversation, the book and the films, with additional thoughts from Martin Scorsese, Richard Linklater and Wes Anderson. Dec. 3 CHRISTMAS, AGAIN A comedy about urban holiday loneliness. Kentucker Audley stars as a Christmas-tree salesman in Brooklyn who comes across a lot of strange customers, including a flirt and a drunk. When this tale of a man with deep romantic wounds played the New Directors/New Films series, Manohla Dargis described it in The Times as a “sensitively shot slice of realism.” Charles Poekel, who wrote and directed, sold trees himself for three years. Dec. 4 ARABIAN NIGHTS The Portuguese director Miguel Gomes channels contemporary events — like unemployment and local elections — into fictional anecdotes set in an economically depressed Portugal in this trilogy. (Volume 2 opens on Dec. 11 and Volume 3 on Dec. 18.) The ultimate storyteller, Scheherazade (Crista Alfaiate), gets into the act. CHI-RAQ Spike Lee takes on Aristophanes. This version of the Greek drama “Lysistrata,” in which women in the fifth century B.C. banded together to withhold sex in order to force their men to end a war, takes place on Chicago’s South Side after a child is killed by a stray bullet. The cast includes Nick Cannon, Jennifer Hudson, Wesley Snipes, Angela Bassett and D. B. Sweeney. CHRISTMAS EVE Worst holiday nightmare (next to Ebenezer Scrooge’s): Being trapped in an elevator on Christmas Eve. Six groups of New Yorkers do in this ensemble comedy, starring Patrick Stewart as a real estate mogul. The most awkward pairing is probably the nasty human resources manager stuck with the employee he just fired. With Cheryl Hines, James Roday, Max Casella and Jon Heder. Mitch Davis wrote and directed. KRAMPUS Here’s that holiday monster from European folklore again, the one who punishes bad children. In this horror comedy from Michael Dougherty, a family Christmas begins as usual until the son (Emjay Anthony) has had enough of the usual dysfunctionality and turns his back on the holiday. At which time the wrath of Krampus is unleashed. THE LADY IN THE VAN This drama comes with an impeccable British pedigree. Written by the playwright Alan Bennett, directed by the former National Theater artistic director Nicholas Hytner and starring Maggie Smith as the title character. The grouchy lady, who is otherwise homeless, finds an off-street parking place for her van, thanks to the kindness of her London neighbors, and stays for years and years and years. With Dominic Cooper and James Corden. A ROYAL NIGHT OUT All of England celebrated the prospect of peace on V.E. Day in 1945, even the royal princesses, who were teenagers at the time. Sarah Gadon (“Dracula Untold”) plays the future Queen Elizabeth, and Bel Powley is her kid sister, Margaret, in this reimagining of the night. Rupert Everett and Emily Watson play their royal parents. Julian Jarrold directed. THE WANNABE The recently minted Oscar winner Patricia Arquette plays a Mafia groupie, in this crime drama written and directed by Nick Sandow. Vincent Piazza plays her boyfriend, who — after trying and failing to fix the mob boss John Gotti’s trial — goes on a drug-addled crime spree, robbing Mafia hangouts. With Michael Imperioli and Mr. Sandow. YOUTH Michael Caine, Harvey Keitel and Jane Fonda star in Paolo Sorrentino’s tale of age, youth and passion. The setting is a luxurious hotel in the Swiss Alps as two men contemplate their artistic careers. Rachel Weisz and Paul Dano represent the younger generations. Dec. 9 STINKING HEAVEN A New Jersey couple run a sober-living commune in their suburban home. Everything goes to hell when a new recovering addict, who happens to be one housemate’s former girlfriend, shows up. Deragh Campbell, Henri Douvry and Hannah Gross star. Directed by Nathan Silver (“Uncertain Terms”). Dec. 11 THE BIG SHORT Way back in 2005, a few people noticed what we all know now: The banking industry had set up the American public with bad mortgage loans, leading to a disastrous economic collapse. In Adam McKay’s film, the guys who figure it out — including characters played by Brad Pitt (looking rakish in a gray-flecked beard), Ryan Gosling, Steve Carell and Christian Bale — are horrified but decide to take advantage anyway with their own investment decisions. Based on Michael Lewis’s book of the same name. Mr. McKay, whose films include “Anchorman” and “Talladega Nights,” sees the big picture. BLEEDING HEART Jessica Biel plays a yoga instructor and Zosia Mamet (“Girls”) is her long-lost sister in this thriller about how far a woman will go to protect someone from a very bad boyfriend. Diane Bell wrote and directed. BOY AND THE WORLD Maybe the modern world would seem less difficult if it were animated. In Al ê Abreu’s film, it is. A little boy set outs from his South American village to follow his father to the big city, and in his young eyes the streets are decoupage and the industrial machines are like big animals. Set to a score of samba, pan flute and Brazilian hip-hop. IN THE HEART OF THE SEA Ron Howard goes down to the sea in ships, telling a grand maritime-disaster story from 1820 New England, the one that inspired Herman Melville’s “Moby-Dick.” Chris Hemsworth, Cillian Murphy, Benjamin Walker and Tom Holland play harpooners who confront the great whale — and must at several points be thinking, “We’re going to need a bigger boat.” Ben Whishaw plays Melville. OF MIND AND MUSIC Aunjanue Ellis (“The Help”) stars in Richie Adams’s New Orleans drama about a beautiful street musician with memory loss. Joaquim de Almeida plays a neuroscientist who tries to help her. THE TAINTED VEIL The hijab, that is. This documentary sets out to shed light on what some see as the “simple head scarf” worn by Muslim women and all the things that aren’t simple about it. Points of view debated include: It’s about covering your head in honor of Allah. It’s about avoiding sexual advances from men. It’s about choice, making a modern and powerful statement about whether to wear it. Directed by Ovidio Salazar, Nahia Al Fahad and Mazen Al-Khayrat. Dec. 16 DREAMS REWIRED Maybe all of today’s worries about privacy and security aren’t that new. When the telephone was first invented, people fretted. The same was true when film and television were new. Tilda Swinton narrates this European documentary, which takes a look back more than a century to the early days of “electric media,” with the help of nearly 200 films made between the 1880s and the 1930s. Manu Luksch, Martin Reinhart and Thomas Tode directed. Dec. 17 LA CREAZIONE DI SIGNIFICATO (THE CREATION OF MEANING) A self-sufficient middle-aged farmer in Tuscany, Italy, where V.E. Day might as well have been yesterday, faces possible loss to a German buyer. Written and directed by the cinematographer Simone Rapisarda Casanova. Dec. 18 ALVIN AND THE CHIPMUNKS: THE ROAD CHIP In this latest Chipmunks movie, directed by Walt Becker, the animated singing rodents Simon, Theodore and Alvin become convinced that their human live-action father figure, Dave (Jason Lee), is going to desert them — right after he proposes to his new girlfriend in New York. So they follow him to the big city. HE NEVER DIED A horror comedy about that quiet, weird guy (Henry Rollins) who lives alone in a depressing apartment, never goes out and just watches television all day. Little do his neighbors know he’s an immortal cannibal. Jason Krawcyzk wrote and directed. SISTERS Tina Fey and Amy Poehler reunite as grown siblings whose childhood home is being sold. Instead of just cleaning out their old rooms, they host a major blowout, partying with old high school pals as if it were 1989. With Maya Rudolph, John Leguizamo, Ike Barinholtz, John Cena, James Brolin and Dianne Wiest. Directed by Jason Moore (“Pitch Perfect”). SON OF SAUL This Holocaust drama from Hungary, which Variety called “terrifyingly accomplished,” won the grand prize at Cannes this year. Set at Auschwitz, Laszlo Nemes’s feature directorial debut follows one Jewish sonderkommando (a prisoner forced to help run the Nazi death camps). STAR WARS: THE FORCE AWAKENS It’s more than 30 years after “Return of the Jedi” — in the film as well as in real life — and that story’s once-young heroes are back: Harrison Ford as Han Solo, Carrie Fisher as Princess Leia and Mark Hamill as Luke Skywalker. They’re joined by Oscar Isaac, Daisy Ridley and John Boyega, along with, among others, Adam Driver and Lupita Nyong’o. J. J. Abrams directed and, with Lawrence Kasdan, wrote the screenplay — about a fallen light saber, a scavenger, a runaway and a search. Dec. 23 WHERE TO INVADE NEXT In the newest subversive comic documentary from Michael Moore (“Fahrenheit 9/11,” “Bowling for Columbine”), Mr. Moore travels the world doing some very practical research. The goal: Choose which nation the United States should declare war against next. That is, which country has the most to offer us? Dec. 24 MR. SIX Feng Xiaogang and Kris Wu star in this gangster dramedy from China that The Hollywood Reporter described as a “a generational clash of values.” Dec. 25 CONCUSSION Will Smith stars in this sports-medical drama as Dr. Bennet Omalu, the Nigerian-born forensic neuropathologist who first identified chronic traumatic encephalopathy, or C.T.E., among football players and wrestlers. The Times has reported that points in the movie were softened over concern about the N.F.L.’s reaction. Peter Landesman (“Parkland”) wrote and directed. Alec Baldwin, Gugu Mbatha-Raw, Eddie Marsan and Stephen Moyer also star. DADDY’S HOME A nice-guy radio executive (Will Ferrell) wants his new stepchildren to love him, but their real dad (Mark Wahlberg) just can’t help being the coolest guy who ever lived. A comedy about unfair competition. With Linda Cardellini, Thomas Haden Church and Hannibal Buress. 45 YEARS The Mercers never had children. But as they’re getting ready for their big 45th-wedding-anniversary party, news from Geoff’s past intrudes. Back in the early 1960s, his girlfriend died from a fall during a holiday in Switzerland. Her body has finally been found, and it turns out that she was pregnant when she died. Geoff turns exceedingly weird. Both Charlotte Rampling and Tom Courtenay won best acting awards at the Berlin Film Festival for their roles as the married couple. Andrew Haigh wrote and directed. THE HATEFUL EIGHT Quentin Tarantino sticks with mid-19th-century America (as with “Django Unchained”) in this drama set in Wyoming shortly after the Civil War. Kurt Russell stars as a bounty hunter headed for the town of Red Rock with his fugitive prize (Jennifer Jason Leigh). A winter storm and their encounters with tough guys (Samuel L. Jackson, Tim Roth, Michael Madsen, Walton Goggins and Bruce Dern) don’t bode well for a timely arrival or the service of justice. Not even at a stagecoach stop called Minnie’s Haberdashery. JOY When David O. Russell has directed Jennifer Lawrence before (“American Hustle,” “Silver Linings Playbook”), the results have been impressive. This time, Ms. Lawrence plays a character partly inspired by Joy Mangano, a real-life designer, inventor and entrepreneur whose best sellers have included space-saving clothes hangers and a mop that can be wrung without getting anyone’s hands wet. A four-generation family saga, this comedy-drama hybrid also stars the previous Russell-Lawrence collaborators Robert De Niro and Bradley Cooper. POINT BREAK It’s been 24 years since Johnny Utah (Keanu Reeves), a young F.B.I. agent, went searching for a group of surfers who were actually bank robbers. That was Kathryn Bigelow’s action adventure. In this remake, the bad guys could be all kinds of extreme athletes — snowboarders and motorcyclists as well as surfers — and Luke Bracey, a young Australian actor, is Johnny Utah. With Edgar Ramirez and Delroy Lindo. Ericson Core directed. THE REVENANT Alejandro G. Iñárritu follows up his best-director Oscar win for “Birdman” with this action-adventure starring Leonardo DiCaprio. Mr. DiCaprio plays an American hunter who is left for dead in the wilderness but fights to survive and to get even with the man (Tom Hardy) who did this to him. With Domhnall Gleeson and Lukas Haas. YELLOW DAY Religious visions, miracles and a search for a lost love. Carl Lauten’s multigenre film (faith-based family fairy-tale romance) about one young man’s experience on a special day at summer camp stars Drew Seeley, Lindsey Shaw and Ashley Boettcher. Dec. 30 ANOMALISA From Charlie Kaufman (“Synecdoche, NewYork”) and Duke Johnson, a stop-motion animated dark comedy about an unhappy motivational speaker. The author of “How May I Help You Help Them?” is great at helping other people, but he’s miserable. Until he meets a sales rep. With the voices of David Thewlis (the speaker), Jennifer Jason Leigh (the sales rep) and Tom Noonan (everybody else). Compiled with the assistance of Suzanne O’Connor. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page AR 34 of the New York edition with the headline: Dinosaurs, Divas and Archers . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              