   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Business Day Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Off the Shelf Personal Finance for Those Who Don’t Have a Clue Image Credit Sonny Figueroa/The New York Times By  Paul B. Brown Jan. 12, 2018 Chelsea Fagan sets herself a high bar in writing “The Financial Diet” (Henry Holt, $19): She wants to prove to people who know little about personal finance that investing is both vital and not all that difficult. Does she deliver? Yes, and surprisingly well. If you had to give her a grade, it would be a solid “B” because of both her supportive tone and her ability to reduce what can be fairly complicated concepts — such as how you put together a comprehensive investment plan — to easily understood bite-size pieces. The biggest advantage Ms. Fagan, who runs a website with the same name as her book, has going for is her approach. She is a millennial writing, in colloquial language that is occasionally profane, for other millennials. For example, in explaining why not enough of her generation understands money, she writes: “It doesn’t help that the information available about personal finance oscillates between a less fun version of your dad yelling at you about stocks and tone-deaf articles about how millennials are not buying homes. (It’s because we have billions in dollars of student debt.)” There is actually another word after the word “debt,” but it is a noun that this paper won’t publish unless it is spoken by a prominent politician. The design by Lauren Ver Hage, who gets billing on the cover, also helps make the book appealing by making important ideas and intriguing thoughts jump out. For example, this sentence gets its own page: “The scariest thing about buying a home, in a lot of ways, is that it requires you do a not-insignificant amount of math.” Widespread Appeal So many finance books are relentlessly masculine in tone and focus that it’s worth mentioning that this one skews female: Most of the experts quoted are women, and many references, to television shows like “Sex and the City,” appear to be oriented toward women, too. But her advice is universal. For example, she suggests saving a combined 20 percent of your income for both short and long-term goals. And, she notes, “Saving, living below your means, and diversifying your income often make the difference between being stuck in a job you can’t stand and having the freedom to move on to something better.” These ideas apply to just about everyone. So why does she not get a higher grade? For two interrelated reasons that boil down to this: She seems to advocate putting too much money into investments that are too conservative for younger investors. The good news is Ms. Fagan is terrific about emphasizing the need to save. Early on, she creates “A Bank Account Pyramid,” explaining where to put the money and when, and she also makes saving money a significant part of a five-point plan that she describes as “The Total Idiot’s Guide to Investing.” But if you look at both, it is easy to see the two problems. A Few Flaws The pyramid starts out with a strong base: Have a basic savings account to house your emergency fund. But it gets shakier from there. In the next layer up, she calls for putting money in certificates of deposit, which are “good for things like saving to buy a house in the next few years and other medium-term savings.” Certainly, you don’t want your down payment to disappear in a market crash the day before the money is due. But having all your money tied up in low-yielding C.D.s for more than three years before you buy a home will make it hard for your money to grow. As I write this, a three-year C.D. yields about just 2.2 percent and a five-year one isn’t much better, 2.6 percent. (Three to five years would seem to fit within Ms. Fagan’s definition of medium-term savings.) So her argument about where to put money for medium-term objectives is debatable — my position would be to hold some stock, shifting the money to more conservative investments as your goal draws nigh. For example, have 100 percent of the money in equities when the goal is five years out; 60 percent in equities and 40 percent in short-term bond funds and C.D.s if you will need the money in 36 months, and only move all the money into short-term C.D.s a year before you have to write the check. Ms. Fagan goes on to say that after putting cash into an emergency fund and buying C.D.s for short and intermediate goals, the rest of your savings should be in “longer term investments.” Like what? She doesn’t say. A 30-year bond would qualify, but it’s an awfully conservative place for a millennial investor saving for the long-term. The same flaw exists in her investment guide. Her first two points are great. Again, it starts with the emergency fund, followed by working hard to pay off nondeductible debt. That is sound advice. But after that, things get squishy. Her third point about opening a retirement account is fine as far as it goes, but where do you put that money? Ms. Fagan doesn’t tell us. And her last point is confusing. After taking the first three steps, she writes, “Explore other low-risk options such as mutual funds and index funds.” Now on the surface that’s just wrong. Mutual funds and index funds that invest in equities, and bonds for that matter, have risk. As the prospectus of each always points out, you can lose money. Giving Ms. Fagan the benefit of the doubt, I think she was trying to say that index funds and other mutual funds carry less risk to your portfolio than investing in individual stocks. However, there are fixed- income mutual funds that offer low yields. Simply saying invest in mutual funds is not helpful. But to be fair, Ms. Fagan did not set out to write the definitive investment book, and she emphasizes throughout that if you are confused, “It’s worth it to pay professionals” to help you with things “you don’t know how to do and will put off until it’s too late.” These quibbles aside, for the most part her advice and conclusions are solid. “We live in a world that encourages us to spend wastefully, accumulate more than we need, and put off things like retirement saving until … we are basically retired,” she says. ” Anything that can help improve matters is a good thing. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page BU 14 of the New York edition with the headline: A Generational Voice for Personal Finance . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              