   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index New York Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by About New York Dean Skelos’s Son Kept a Hand Out, and Never Took ‘No’ for an Answer Image State Senator Dean G. Skelos leaving Federal District Court in Manhattan on Tuesday after closing arguments in the corruption trial in which he and his son Adam are co-defendants. Credit Brendan Mcdermid/Reuters By  Jim Dwyer Dec. 8, 2015 In a season when two of the three most powerful political figures in New York State have been hauled into court on corruption charges, you might expect at least some gaudy spoils of the alleged plunder to be on display. Perhaps someone, somewhere, had a pink Cadillac parked outside, a condominium on the Caribbean, or maybe just a pinkie ring crusted with enough diamonds to set sunbeams dancing. In the case of Dean G. Skelos, the former Republican majority leader of the State Senate, and his son, the hard-to-employ Adam Skelos, the government said it was a house in Rockville Centre that Adam wanted but could not get a mortgage for. “The new house with the pool,” Rahul Mukhi, a federal prosecutor, reminded the jury in closing arguments in Manhattan federal court on Tuesday. “The one Senator Skelos was going to have to foot the bill for, unless Adam Skelos got an infusion of cash.” The palette of recent Albany corruption has included finagling for a mayoral nomination, secret legal fees and now, it is charged, easy money for a son who always had his hand out. In this case, which is likely to go to the jury on Wednesday, a parade of witnesses has said that Senator Skelos spared no effort asking people who needed legislative favors to find something for his son. An avalanche of evidence has shown that the financial needs of the younger Mr. Skelos were discussed by the senator practically in the same breath as issues affecting millions of people across the state, such as rent regulations, tax breaks for developers and campaign finance reforms opposed by sectors of the real estate industry. A senior executive of one development company testified that he was exasperated and worried by the senator’s repeated pleas to help his son while the developer was hoping to influence tax legislation. The executive ended up commanding a title insurance company to give Adam Skelos a commission for a sale in which he had played no role. Image Adam Skelos and his father are accused of using Senator Skelos's position to enrich Adam. Credit Brendan Mcdermid/Reuters “Twenty thousand dollars for nothing,” Mr. Mukhi said, adding, “That’s $20,000 less that the senator had to put up for the new house.” Another job arranged for the younger Mr. Skelos by the developer, Glenwood Management, paid him $4,000 a month, though he seldom showed up. Glenwood had given $10 million in contributions to Albany officials, but Mr. Mukhi said the developer still felt the peril of secret negotiations among the governor, the speaker of the State Assembly, and the majority leader of the State Senate. “You can be killed in Albany and not know how or when it happened,” Mr. Mukhi said. Besides arranging payments to Adam Skelos, Glenwood also channeled legal fees to the former speaker, Sheldon Silver, who was convicted last month of extortion. Neither Skelos testified, nor did they present any witnesses. Instead, their lawyers have argued that the senator had done no more for his son than any father would. “You can be a member of the New York State Senate and a Senate leader and still be a father,” G. Robert Gage Jr., the lawyer for Senator Skelos, told the jury in an opening statement. “You could root for your son, care for your son, and be involved with your son, as Senator Skelos was. It’s not a crime.” Moreover, even though the younger Mr. Skelos was portrayed by the witnesses as an entitled slacker — demanding jobs, getting them and barely doing a lick of work — the defense lawyers have said, in effect, that being annoying is not a federal crime. Still, the situation had gotten so out of hand, former United States Senator Alfonse M. D’Amato testified, that he paid a visit to Senator Skelos to warn him that his son was barely showing up for one of the jobs and was a contentious presence when he did come in. He also pestered people — and his father — for sources of money. “Adam wasn’t shy about approaching people and about getting work or about bugging his dad to get him people’s contact information, especially if he thought there might be business opportunities there,” Christopher Conniff, the lawyer for the younger Mr. Skelos, said at the beginning of the trial. “You probably know plenty of people like this in your own lives. People that never take that first ‘no’ for the final answer, and keep pushing until they get an opportunity. That is Adam.” Prosecutors had blocked what they called sympathy evidence, which might have shown that Adam Skelos, who was adopted, had an emotionally turbulent life. The defense hinted at it. “This aspect of Adam’s relationship with his dad is critical to this case, and it goes to the heart of why Dean had such close involvement with Adam’s life,” Mr. Conniff said. “The government is trying to tell you that this father’s effort to be a good parent and a good friend to a sometimes immature and emotional son is part of some kind of criminal scheme.” Parents do try to line up jobs for their kids. Half the country would be in handcuffs if that were a crime. But Mr. Mukhi said that swapping official favors for jobs is just as much against the law as robbing a bank. The robber, he said, cannot claim, “ ‘I didn’t commit a crime because I gave it to my son.’ ” Email: dwyer@nytimes.com Twitter: @jimdwyernyt   A version of this article appears in print on , on Page A 29 of the New York edition with the headline: Keeping a Hand Out, and Never Taking ‘No’ for an Answer . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              