   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Weddings Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Ashley Bryant, Kahlil Williams Image Sept. 18, 2016 Ashley Marie Bryant and Kahlil Charles Williams were married Sept. 13 by Edwina Townes, a staff member in the office of the New York City Clerk, at the Manhattan Marriage Bureau. On Sept. 17, the couple had a ceremony at Il Mercato, an event space in New Orleans, that was led by a friend, Cary P. McClelland, who became a Universal Life minister for the event. Mrs. Williams, 30, is a director, overseeing corporate transactions, in the office of the general counsel at PricewaterhouseCoopers in Manhattan. She graduated from Northwestern University and also received a law degree from Harvard. She is a daughter of Bobbi L. Harbourn and a stepdaughter of Charles T. Harbourn of Quincy, Ill. The bride’s stepfather retired as the owner of C & B Steel, a manufacturer of steel railings in Quincy. Mr. Williams, 37, is a litigation associate at the Manhattan law firm Davis Polk & Wardwell. He graduated from Penn State, and also received a master’s degree in political science from the University of Pennsylvania and a law degree from Columbia. He is the son of Evon G. Williams and Charles B. Williams, both of Philadelphia. The groom’s mother is a budget manager for the Philadelphia Housing Authority. His father retired as a master sergeant from the United States Air Force; he maintained missiles at F.E. Warren Air Force Base in Cheyenne, Wyo. The couple met in 2012 at Davis Polk, where the bride was then an associate. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page ST 25 of the New York edition with the headline: Ashley Bryant,  Kahlil Williams . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              