   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Europe Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Spanish Premier Insists Vote on Catalan Independence Will Not Happen By  Raphael Minder Sept. 29, 2014 MADRID — Two weeks after Scotland voted against leaving Britain, another and more contentious secession fight is hurtling ahead in Europe, with Spain and its independence-minded region of Catalonia increasingly at odds and showing few signs of willingness to compromise. Responding to a decree signed on Saturday by Catalonia’s leader authorizing an independence vote on Nov. 9, Prime Minister Mariano Rajoy of Spain declared on Monday that the vote would not go ahead because it violates Spain’s Constitution and would be rejected by the Constitutional Court. The standoff raised the prospect that Catalans might seek to go ahead with the referendum even in the face of opposition from the central government, creating a deep split within Spain, encouraging other separatists in Europe — including those in Spain’s Basque region — and leaving Mr. Rajoy with a volatile political challenge. Later on Monday, Spain’s Constitutional Court voted in a special session to suspend the Catalan decree pending a final ruling on its validity. Mr. Rajoy’s firm stance could leave him “being legally right but still facing a growing problem of legitimacy that won’t be removed unless the question of Catalonia’s future and sovereignty gets somehow addressed,” said José Ignacio Torreblanca, head of the Spanish office of the European Council on Foreign Relations, a research group. Polls suggest that Catalans are split on the secession question, but that a majority are in favor of the issue being put to a vote. It is not clear what steps Mr. Rajoy would take should the Catalans press ahead with a vote in the face of a court ruling against them and opposition from the central government. But if a vote was to take place, it could well become an issue that draws in other European governments, some of whom face separatist movements of their own. If Scots had voted to break away in a referendum approved by the British government, the European Union would have “somehow adjusted, even if on some issues Brussels would have had to square a legal circle,” Mr. Torreblanca said. If Catalonia holds a vote without the approval of Mr. Rajoy’s government, however, “it would be a real earthquake for the E.U., forcing other Europeans to enter uncharted waters and take sides in a national dispute that has no precedent.” The decree signed by Artur Mas, the Catalan leader, ratcheted up a dispute that began two years ago over fiscal issues into a secessionist challenge with political risks for both leaders. Spain holds a general election next year. Mr. Rajoy accused Mr. Mas on Monday of irresponsibility in pushing Catalans toward a secession vote when, under Spain’s Constitution, only a majority of Spaniards can alter Spain’s “indivisible sovereignty.” “There isn’t anybody who can deprive all Spaniards of the right to decide over what is their country,” Mr. Rajoy said at a news conference after an emergency cabinet meeting. “Whoever has got underway this whole process is responsible for its serious consequences.” A vote, Mr. Rajoy said, “is against the law, steps beyond democracy, divides Catalans, moves them away from Europe and hurts their well-being.” Mr. Mas, however, said in a television interview on Sunday that it was Mr. Rajoy who was forcing a vote by refusing to make any fiscal or other concessions to Catalonia. “There is no plan B,” Mr. Mas said in the interview with La Sexta, a Spanish TV channel. Mr. Mas has trumpeted Scotland’s referendum as a “great lesson in democracy” that Mr. Rajoy should heed. For Spain, the economic consequences of a secession would likely be greater than they would have been for Britain. Spain is still recovering economically from the euro debt crisis and continues to struggle with near-record unemployment, following a lengthy recession and a banking bailout. Scotland’s 5.3 million people represent about 8 percent of Britain’s population and account for 9 percent of its economic output. But Scotland’s North Sea oil assets make it the wealthiest part of Britain per capita; this fed into secessionist arguments that Scotland’s economy could thrive without support from London. Catalonia’s 7.5 million people represent 16 percent of the Spanish population, but also account for a larger share of Spain’s economy — 19 percent. That has fueled resentment among Catalans about Spain’s fiscal system, which redistributes their taxes to weaker Spanish regions. Mr. Rajoy said on Monday that he was willing to resume “a fruitful dialogue” with Mr. Mas about some economic concessions, “but always within the return to legality.” Mr. Rajoy refused to discuss how his government would respond if Catalonia set up ballot boxes on Nov. 9. The Catalan regional government has budgeted 8.9 million euros — about $11.3 million — to finance the vote. A Catalan vote would also be a bellwether for other independence-minded regions, notably the Basque region, which has a long and violent history of separatism. Mr. Mas, on the other hand, faces the difficult choice of going ahead with an illegal vote or of delaying the vote to allow for further negotiations with Mr. Rajoy, which could lead to protests in Catalonia. He could also call early elections in Catalonia — with the risk that more hard-line secessionist politicians could win and oust him and his Convergence party from power. Mr. Mas insisted on Sunday that he acted within the law, signing a decree that was validated by Catalonia’s own legal experts, as well as an overwhelming majority of regional lawmakers. Still, he noted that history also offered examples of civil disobedience leading to political and social progress. Catalonia “isn’t Kosovo,” said Mr. Torreblanca, the political analyst, “but it’s hard to believe that at least a small fraction of Catalans will not get more radical, because the sense of frustration if there is no vote will be very real.” On Sept. 11, hundreds of thousands of pro-independence Catalans marched in Barcelona on Catalonia’s national day to demand a vote. Catalans have a strong cultural identity and have long clashed with Madrid. The botched proclamation of a Catalan state during the 1930s was eventually followed by the Spanish Civil War and the lengthy dictatorship of its winner, Francisco Franco. Spain’s return to democracy in the late 1970s, however, allowed Catalonia and other regions to reclaim some autonomy — notably over an education system in which Catalan was promoted as the main language — in return for broad cooperation with successive governments in Madrid. Under Jordi Pujol, who founded the Convergence party and led Catalonia from 1980 to 2003, Catalonia’s government then “followed a pragmatic approach of seeking concessions from Madrid, but not ones that could ever lead to a break-up,” said Josep Fontana, a Catalan historian. Even with his political future in the balance, Mr. Mas will not proceed with a vote that would have “no international credibility” if held against a constitutional ruling, said Josep Ramoneda, a Catalan writer and political columnist. “It’s a situation that is extremely difficult to unblock and that is likely to leave Catalonia stuck in muddy waters for a long time,” Mr. Ramoneda said. “Sooner or later, there will be a referendum because even if the path chosen by Mas isn’t the right one, you cannot just respond to such sovereignty demands with legal arguments.” Correction :  Because of an editing error, a previous version of this article gave an incorrect equivalent, in dollars, of the 8.9 million euros that the Catalan regional government has budgeted for an independence referendum. It is $11.3 million, not $113 million. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page A 9 of the New York edition with the headline: Vote on Catalan Independence Will Not Happen, Premier Says . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Related Coverage Leader of Catalonia Calls for Independence Vote Sept. 27, 2014 As Catalonia Weighs Independence From Spain, Leader Seizes Spotlight Sept. 26, 2014 Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              