   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Weddings Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Elizabeth Arkell, Scott Anderson Image Sept. 10, 2017 Elizabeth Carter Arkell and Scott Richard Anderson were married Sept. 9 under Colorado’s self-uniting marriage statute at Planet Bluegrass, a music and events space in Lyons, Colo. Laurie C. Power, an aunt of the bride, led the couple in their vows. Ms. Arkell, 29, is to begin working in October at the law firm Steptoe & Johnson in Washington. She graduated cum laude from Claremont McKenna College in Claremont, Calif., and received a law degree from Harvard. She is the daughter of Betty Carter Arkell and David Arkell of Denver. The bride’s parents are partners in Denver law firms, her father in the construction law practice at Moye White and her mother in the corporate practice group at Holland & Hart. She is on the board of her firm’s nonprofit foundation, which provides community services; and on the Southwest region board of Accion, which is based in Albuquerque and provides microloans to low- to moderate-income entrepreneurs. In October, Mr. Anderson, 33, is to begin working as a David M. Rubenstein fellow in governance studies at the Brookings Institution in Washington. In August, he completed a Council on Foreign Relation’s International Affairs Fellowship at the Harvard Law School Program on International Law and Armed Conflict in Cambridge, Mass. He graduated with high honors from the University of Virginia, and received a law degree from Yale. He is a son of Jocelyn Call Anderson and Richard B. Anderson Jr.of McLean, Va. The groom’s mother is a freelance interior designer in McLean. His father is the president and the chief executive of National Capital Bank of Washington. He is on the board of the Arlington Partnership for Affordable Housing in Arlington, Va. The couple met at a Halloween party in 2013 at Baghdaddy’s, the lone bar at the United States Embassy in Baghdad, while Ms. Arkell helped managed international development projects for the State Department’s Iraq office and Mr. Anderson worked as an attorney-adviser on bilateral issues. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page ST 24 of the New York edition with the headline: Elizabeth Arkell,  Scott Anderson . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              