   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Best of the Web Stuff We Liked: Judge Judy, Best Countries, Unlikely Job Hunts By  Damon Darlin Jan. 22, 2016 This article was initially published as a letter to subscribers of The Upshot’s newsletter. You can sign up for the email here to get this and all of the best of The Upshot. Let’s start with the end in mind: How you will die .  It can only get better from there. More analysis of big city bike-sharing programs: This one on CityLab looks at income inequality and riders . Julia Ursaki and Lisa Aultman-Hall of the University of Vermont Transportation Research Center found that in most cities the poor and less educated do not rent the bikes. Image Judith Sheindlin, a.k.a. Judge Judy, in her backstage “chambers” in 1997. Credit Monica Almeida/The New York Times This Wall Street Journal interactive graphic, while not terribly innovative, is immersive about the composition of corporate boards . You can parse board membership by sex, age and pay. (Only three companies have boards where half the directors are women. You've probably never heard of them.) You may have seen the articles that a survey found that 10 percent of college graduates think Judge Judy is on the Supreme Court. The MonkeyCage took the time to explain how the question was asked . Its conclusion: People aren’t that stupid. (And here I thought that maybe 10 percent knew how to expertly mess with survey takers.) You know that U.S. News and World Report ranks colleges and hospitals. It just issued its ranking of countries . Germany, you are No. 1. America? An ignominious No. 4. You can just imagine prospective immigrants poring over the results with their moms and dads. And speaking of specious data, we got a charge out of this map of the most searched-for occupation of each state. When “pirate” is the top choice in North Carolina (mascot of East Carolina University?) and “potato” in Ohio, the data is, shall we say, suspect. Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              