   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Education Life Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Pop Quiz Answers to the Fiske Guide to College Histories July 31, 2015 For questions from the college history quiz, click here . 1. Washington College in Chestertown, Md., with support from George Washington, was the first created in the new nation, in 1782. 2. The Georgia project languished for 16 years, until 1801. In the meantime, the University of North Carolina opened in Chapel Hill in 1795. 3. Jon Stewart and Thomas Jefferson are alumni of the College of William & Mary. The “Daily Show” host majored in psychology; the founding father’s course of study lasted two years before he went on to read law. 4. a. ii. The curriculum at St. John’s, which has campuses in Maryland and New Mexico, is organized around the study of great books, starting with the Greek classics. b. iv. Joseph Smith established the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, which founded Brigham Young University in Provo, Utah, in 1875. c. i. Principia College in Elsah, Ill., calls itself a “college for Christian Scientists,” the church founded by Mary Baker Eddy. d. iii. John Dewey’s progressive ideas on education helped shape free-spirited Bennington College in Vermont, where he served as a trustee. e. v . Benjamin Franklin started what is now the University of Pennsylvania with an emphasis on practical education and public service. 5. a. Katharine Mary Drexel, daughter of a wealthy Philadelphia banker, established dozens of missions and schools, including Xavier University in New Orleans, the only historically black Roman Catholic college in the country, in 1915. She was canonized in 2000. Her uncle, Anthony Joseph Drexel, founded what was to become Drexel University. b. William Marsh Rice, who made his fortune in Houston, chartered what would become Rice University in 1891 as a gift to the city. The court determined that Rice died from chloroform, killed by his valet in a conspiracy with the family lawyer to claim his estate using a forged will. c. On April 21, 1909, residents of Georgetown, Tex., decorated buildings and served barbecue to Southwestern University alumni, who had returned to watch their baseball team defeat visiting Baylor University. A year later, the University of Illinois in Urbana added a football game to the idea of homecoming. d. Like the Ohio town of Oberlin, a stop on the Underground Railroad, Oberlin College was active in the abolitionist movement. e. Favoring a deeper evaluation of applicants, in 1969 Bowdoin College in Maine made SATs and ACTs optional. For the class of 2018, 30 percent of matriculants chose not to submit test scores. More than 850 four-year colleges are now test optional. 6. a. iv. Following a 2006 report documenting early donors’ roles in the slave trade — Nicholas Brown Jr., the university’s namesake, was the scion of a slave-owning mercantile family — Brown announced reparations, including an endowment to assist public education in Providence, R.I. b. iii. No one misses the irony that Durham, N.C., home to the Duke family, was once known as the City of Tobacco but now bills itself as the City of Medicine. c. ii . Florida Presbyterian College in St. Petersburg, Fla., was renamed Eckerd College in 1972, in recognition of Jack M. Eckerd, its principal donor and creator of the drugstore chain (since divided and acquired by CVS and Rite Aid). d. i. Leland Stanford, who founded the university as a memorial to his only child, represented the Central Pacific Railroad at the ceremonial driving of the Golden Spike in Promontory, Utah, which signaled the completion of the first transcontinental railroad in 1869. 7.  a. The Altair 8800 minicomputer on the cover of Popular Electronics inspired Bill Gates and his friend Paul Allen to be the first to start a business writing software for the new generation of computers. They left Harvard and Washington State, respectively, to found Microsoft. b. After freshman year, Michael Dell left the University of Texas, where he had sold computers to dorm mates using stock parts, to pursue his dream. c. Steve Jobs dropped out of Reed after only six months because, he said in a 2005 commencement address at Stanford, he felt he was wasting his parents’ money. But he continued to hang around, and sat in on a class in calligraphy, an art form for which Reed is famous. “If I had never dropped in on that single course in college,” he said, “the Mac would have never had multiple typefaces or proportionally spaced fonts.” 8. a . A group of students at Goucher College in Baltimore invented Humans vs. Zombies, a large-scale tag game using equipment like foam darts, marshmallows and socks. The game can go on for weeks and engage hundreds of students. b. Needing a diversion, Xander Manshel and Alex Benepe, students at Middlebury College, came up with earthbound rules for quidditch, the Harry Potter sport. More than 200 colleges and universities are now registered with the Intercollegiate Quidditch Association. BONUS QUESTION Edward B. Fiske was the first editor; the debut issue was April 13, 1986. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page 26 of Education Life with the headline: Answers . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Related Coverage The Fiske Guide to College Histories July 31, 2015 Image Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              