   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Opinion Supported by Op-Ed Contributor This Gun Maker Wanted Safe Guns By  Eliza Sydnor Romm Ms. Romm is a descendent of a founder of Smith & Wesson, the gun manufacturer. April 5, 2018 Image Credit Alex Merto In the early 1880s, legend has it that Daniel B. Wesson, a co-founder of Smith & Wesson, the gun manufacturer, heard about a child who injured himself by cocking the hammer and pulling the trigger of one of his firm’s revolvers. Wesson, known as D. B., was so distraught about the accident that he and his son, Joseph, developed a more child-safe revolver that they called the .38 Safety Hammerless. Wesson was also my great-great-great-grandfather. Though it has been half a century since my family was involved with Smith & Wesson, I feel a twinge of responsibility every time a mass shooting occurs. I realize this is not entirely rational: I play no part in making or selling firearms and have never lost anyone close to me from gun violence. But it still haunts me. After 17 people were killed at Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School in Parkland, Fla., I learned the shooter used a Smith & Wesson M&P 15, a version of an AR-15 military-style rifle. So I had to ask myself: What would D. B. Wesson have wanted his company to do? Would he have accepted the repeated refrain, “Guns don’t kill people, people kill people”? Obviously I cannot know what D. B. Wesson would want. But I would like to believe that he would have recoiled in horror and disbelief at the weapons created by the brand still bearing his name. And that he would have wanted all of us to ask more of his company today. It is only fair for me, for all of us, to demand that our gun manufacturers become leaders in this national discussion around gun violence. They create products designed to kill human beings. The responsibility that must accompany the creation of weapons like an AR-15 is too large to be brushed aside by shouting about freedom and an amendment to our Constitution ratified in 1791. Yes, the company and other gun makers have taken some steps in calling for better enforcement of the national background check system and sponsoring firearm safety programs. But they can do so much more. I would start by asking the parent company of Smith & Wesson, American Outdoor Brands Corporation, to push for gun-violence research. Since 1996 the federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has been severely restricted in researching  gun violence . If gun manufacturers are truly responsible organizations, they should wholeheartedly want to back this research as a public health concern. Dr. Thomas Frieden, director of the C.D.C. from 2009 to 2017, asked Congress repeatedly to fund research in gun-violence prevention but never succeeded. In response to recent questions from BlackRock, an investment firm that owns the largest share of American Outdoor Brands, the gun maker’s president, James Debney, and chairman, Barry M. Monheit, said, “We must collectively have the courage to ensure any actions are guided by data, by facts and by what will actually make us safer.” Sounds like Mr. Debney, Mr. Monheit and Dr. Frieden are on the same page, so let’s see Smith & Wesson lead the charge in renewing gun-violence research by the C.D.C. I would also ask that the company publicly endorse the Brady Campaign’s Gun Dealer Code of Conduct . It should support requiring universal background checks and a national registry for tracking its products, and indeed all firearms. These measures would help prevent weapons from falling into the hands of the wrong people and make it easier for law enforcement to trace guns used in illegal activities. The refrain that criminals will always get their hands on a weapon, no matter what a gun manufacturer does, is apathetic and unacceptable. What will you do to make it better? Most obvious of all, Smith & Wesson should be pushing to require that all people who buy firearms undergo formal weapons training. Why would any responsible gun manufacturer not want a buyer trained extensively in how to properly use its very dangerous weapon? Do more than you are doing now. Have a purpose other than making money. Take part in this national discussion. Beyond expressions of sympathy, show the families of the victims of Parkland and Newtown and Columbine and Las Vegas and every nameless gun-violence tragedy occurring every day that you care about their pain and suffering. D. B. Wesson was a brilliant inventor who created a better gun than anyone had imagined in the 19th century. When he died in 1906, his guns had made him a multimillionaire. But he also cared deeply about the health and welfare of families and children. In his will, he left $450,000, the equivalent of more than $11 million in today’s money, for a hospital specializing in homeopathic medicine that was built a few years before he died and for the construction of another hospital to provide maternity care. If hearing about one child injured in the 1880s led him to invent the .38 Safety Hammerless, what would the more than 7,000 children killed or injured each year in the United States from gun violence stir in him? I believe if he could, he would beg the executives running Smith & Wesson today to stand up and join the fight to stop this bloodshed any way possible. Eliza Sydnor Romm, a distant relative of a co-founder of Smith & Wesson, the gun manufacturer, is a small-business owner living in North Carolina.  Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter (@NYTopinion) , and sign up for the Opinion Today newsletter . A version of this article appears in print on , on Page A 23 of the New York edition with the headline: Gun Makers Must Do More . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              