   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Soccer Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by European Championships | Iceland 2, England 1 Upset Loss to Iceland Has England Gnashing Its Teeth Image Clockwise from left, England’s Joe Hart, Dele Alli and Gary Cahill after a surprising 2-1 loss to Iceland in the round of 16 at the European Championships. Credit Yves Herman/Reuters By  Victor Mather June 27, 2016 England lost a game on Monday. That has happened before. But England lost this European Championships round-of-16 game in Nice, France, to Iceland, a country of about 300,000 people that had never played in a major tournament before this one. Iceland: a team with two managers, one of whom, Heimir Hallgrimsson, is a part-time dentist. And England had the lead, too, on a Wayne Rooney penalty kick after just four minutes. Yet it managed to lose by 2-1 on goals by Ragnar Sigurdsson, who plays for Krasnodar in the top Russian league, and Kolbeinn Sigthorsson, who plays for Nantes in the top French league. England, which had won all 10 games in qualifying for the Euros but finished second to Wales in Group B, lacked any offensive firepower even though its team is packed with stars from the same Premier League that fills TV screens worldwide every weekend while the likes of Krasnodar and Nantes play in obscurity. The loss was so embarrassing that England Manager Roy Hodgson resigned immediately after the game. Reading a statement that English news outlets speculated had been written before the game, Hodgson said, “I am sorry it will have to end this way, but these things happen.” Losing to Iceland, the smallest country ever to have qualified for a major tournament, is only the latest humiliating performance for England. Under Hodgson, England did not win any games at the 2014 World Cup in Brazil. England has not won a knockout-stage match in a major tournament since 2006, unable to meet the expectations of an enthusiastic soccer nation. Video After an unexpected loss to Iceland, English fan’s expressed frustration and disappointment. Published On June 27, 2016 Credit Image by Jean Christophe Magnenet/Agence France-Presse — Getty Images “They thought that this would be a walk in the park,” Sigurdsson told reporters. “We had faith in our ability.” Rooney converted the early penalty kick after Raheem Sterling was tripped up by Iceland goalkeeper Hannes Halldorsson. Iceland responded quickly as Sigurdsson volleyed in a pass from Kari Arnason in the sixth minute. Sigthorsson scored the decisive goal in the 18th minute when England keeper Joe Hart could only get a hand on the ball. At the final whistle, Aron Gunnarsson, Iceland’s captain, who plays for Cardiff in the second tier of English soccer, tore off his shirt and ran over to fans, leading his teammates in dancing and singing, The Associated Press reported. In Iceland’s capital, Reykjavik, an estimated 10,000 people watched the match on a giant screen downtown. Fireworks were set off, and residents danced on their balconies. In England, where the news media and the public are not known for treating defeat with an attitude of “Well played, boys,” the knives came out in a hurry. Here is some of the best, or worst, of the immediate reaction. Ian Darke, ESPN commentator “England staring at maybe the biggest humiliation in their history in the game of football, the game that England gave to the world.” The Sun “It’s like watching what happens when your dog plays FIFA.” The Guardian “For the second time in a week, England suffer an ignominious exit from Europe.” The Mirror “There are three certainties in life: death, taxes and mediocre England displays in major tournaments.” Chris Waddle , former player “We haven’t got leaders — they’re all pampered. I would never pay to watch Iceland, but they’ve got great camaraderie.” BBC Sport “Try telling someone like my dad that England have lost a game of football to Iceland. He’d laugh in your face.” Daily Express “Well done, Iceland. They deserve it. England don’t deserve a bean from that performance.” Daily Star headline “Laughing stock.” Daily Telegraph “There are people who wake up without their shoes with a text from their boss saying they’ve been fired and an empty memory from the night before who have had a more successful evening.” Even two of England’s most experienced players apologized for the team’s performance. “From the bottom of my heart, I am sorry,” Hart told reporters. Rooney added: “It’s embarrassing for us. We know we’re a better team. You can’t explain it.” A version of this article appears in print on , on Page B 15 of the New York edition with the headline: A Shocking Loss Leaves England Exasperated . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Related Coverage Italy Displays New Flair as Spain Shows Its Age June 27, 2016 Image Lionel Messi and Argentina Miss Again as Chile Wins Copa América June 26, 2016 Image Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              