   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Wealth Matters Kroc’s Giving, Like McDonald’s Meals, Was Fast and Super-Sized Image Ray Kroc and his wife, Joan, at a San Diego Padres game in 1980. Mr. Kroc owned the team at the time. Credit Getty Images By  Paul Sullivan Jan. 20, 2017 THIS is a story of a twice-divorced businessman and his beautiful third wife. He is a man with a string of business failures to his name until he latches on to someone’s else’s idea and makes it a hit. He is a man who wiggles out of contracts, does anything to win and rewrites history to suit him. Eventually, his fortune is made by making his business synonymous with a now-famous last name that he unabashedly promotes far and wide. It just wasn’t his last name. Ray Kroc, the man credited with turning McDonald’s into one of the most recognized brands in the world, is finally getting his star turn with a film, “The Founder,” that opened nationwide on Friday. His third wife, Joan B. Kroc, is also getting her due thanks to a biography, “Ray & Joan: The Man Who Made the McDonald’s Fortune and the Woman Who Gave It All Away,” which came out at the end of 2016. When it comes to their wealth and how they thought about it, the book’s subtitle encapsulates the Kroc approach. Think of the money as a snowball getting larger as it is rolled up a mountain, then melting as it comes down the other side: Mr. Kroc amassed a huge fortune as McDonald’s expanded; his wife spent the two decades after his death in 1984 giving most of it to philanthropic causes . Both the book and the film provide insight into the inner, overlooked — and sometimes mocked — lives of the mega-affluent. It is true for many self-made millionaires who becoming wealthy entails a good bit of luck and requires a myopic focus — often at the sacrifice of everything else. And then comes the question: What you do with all that money when you could never spend it all? How did the Krocs amass their fortune? First, the rise up the mountain. Mr. Kroc wasn’t a failed salesman so much as one who had not hit on a huge idea. Indeed, he was selling milkshake mixers when he came across the McDonald brothers and their assembly-line system of serving burgers, fries and drinks at their walk-up stand in San Bernardino, Calif. Mr. Kroc saw the franchise potential in what the brothers had created. He pulled them along, often reluctantly, until he found a way to buy them out and make what they had created seem like it had been his all along. “When’s enough going to be enough for you?” his first wife, Ethel, asks him in the film. “Honestly, probably never,” Mr. Kroc replies. What motivated him was more complex than money. It was a desire to build something revolutionary, which, for good or bad, is represented by McDonald’s. “He was a man in his 50s in the 1950s when his contemporaries were looking for a soft landing, and he had yet to ring the bell,” said John Lee Hancock, the film’s director. “He felt he was owed. When he saw it, he knew it.” Mr. Kroc, as described in the film and the book, was a man with an entrepreneur’s tireless energy. “He realized it was really about boots on the ground and owner-operators and being out there at night picking gum off the parking lot,” Mr. Hancock said. But as the years passed, Mr. Kroc seemed to convince himself that he alone had started McDonald’s. To him, the start of the company was the first restaurant he opened, in 1954, in Des Plaines, Ill., not the stand the brothers created in 1940. The more he told the story, the more he seemed to believe it. There was no question that Mr. Kroc was committed to the business. He mortgaged and nearly lost his home when the franchising payments he negotiated with the brothers were not enough to pay for his expenses as he traveled to expand the brand. When the company went public in 1965, he became a multimillionaire and ultimately a billionaire. Yet he still had the same entrepreneurial drive to extend the McDonald’s brand as far as it could go. Image Michael Keaton portraying Ray Kroc in the new film “The Founder.” Credit The Weinstein Company The picture that emerges of his third wife, Joan, is different. If you discount her leaving her first husband, a McDonald’s franchisee, for the richer Mr. Kroc, she lived a life of decorum and public service. How she spent down that mountain Mr. Kroc had built was far more haphazard. Her giving started the way it does for many philanthropists, with an issue close to her heart: alcoholism and its impact on families. Mr. Kroc drank the cheap Early Times whiskey, regularly and steadily. Fueled by it, he could be irascible. But as Mrs. Kroc gave more money to finance research, make films about the effects of the disease and push for changes in medical school curriculums, she did not let on that Mr. Kroc was himself an alcoholic. Secrecy was a hallmark of her giving. When a flood wiped out parts of the area in South Dakota in 1972 where she had lived with her first husband, she gave $50,000 on the condition that her name not be linked to the gift. It led to decades of giving to organizations and people who came to her attention. This culminated in 2003 in $2.7 billion being distributed at her death to various groups. Among the gifts: $1.5 billion to the Salvation Army , $225 million to National Public Radio and $500,000 to Auntie Helen’s Fluff N’ Fold , a laundry service that helps those with H.I.V./AIDS in San Diego. “There was this playful sense of mystery about her,” said Lisa Napoli, the author of “Ray & Joan.” “The volume of money she had access to was unfathomable to her when she stepped back and thought about it. The anonymity was a way to protect herself from the deluge of formal requests.” After Mr. Kroc’s death in 1984 , she did things her own way, some of which would be considered wrong by current philanthropic standards. She closed her foundation as a way to insulate herself from requests and to avoid bureaucracy, Ms. Napoli wrote. For philanthropists today, it is the foundation that provides protection. The donor can use it as a buffer and make the executive director the scapegoat if a gift isn’t given. Mrs. Kroc was more hands-on than most. “She preferred to toss money at a cause or concern that piqued her interest,” Ms. Napoli wrote. “What kind of impact the gift would have generally seemed less important than the investment itself — her trust in the act of giving.” Yet she had a sense that she still wasn’t doing enough and was determined to find the causes that moved her. She was not one to sit back and read grant proposals. “Most knew not to bother asking” for a donation, Ms. Napoli writes. “If they did, they’d be denied.” It was driving around San Diego with a friend who was a former mayor that gave Mrs. Kroc the idea to pay for elaborate recreational centers in poor neighborhoods that the Salvation Army would run. For a center in San Diego, she gave $80 million in 1998 to build it and provide it with an endowment for its upkeep. But much of the last rush of giving, the $2.7 billion that was dispensed through her estate, came together when she was told she had brain cancer and would not live longer than a few months. “It’s almost like she made a Christmas list,” said Ms. Napoli, a former technology reporter for The New York Times. “You give $1.5 billon to the Salvation Army. But then, oops, here’s this $225 million in a charitable remainder trust the girls didn’t want,” Ms. Napoli said, referring to Mrs. Kroc and her four granddaughters. “It wasn’t like she said I love N.P.R. and I’m going to give them all my money. It’s more fantastic that she had no connection,” she said. In her giving, Mrs. Kroc was unlike today’s billionaires, assiduously planning and tracking their largess for perpetuity. “She wasn’t thinking about her legacy,” Ms. Napoli said. “She just wanted it gone instead of thinking about the hassle. I love what Gates and Buffett have done with the Giving Pledge, but she did the same thing without making a big deal about it.” Today she is thanked regularly on N.P.R. for her bequest and, to date, 26 recreational centers have been built with the money she left to the Salvation Army. Her approach may have been fast, but it was unique to her, and is still being felt. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page B 3 of the New York edition with the headline: Supersize Giving by the Widow of a McDonald’s Mogul . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Related Coverage Review: ‘The Founder,’ the Story of a Supersize Businessman Jan. 19, 2017 Image video Anatomy of a Scene | ‘The Founder’ Jan. 19, 2017 Image ‘The Founder’: Burgers, Fries and a Couple of Wiseguys Jan. 18, 2017 Image Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              