   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Politics Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Showdown Between Carly Fiorina and Donald Trump Expected at Republican Debate Image Carly Fiorina at a campaign event in Dover, N.H., on Saturday. Credit Ian Thomas Jansen-Lonnquist for The New York Times By  Amy Chozick and Patrick Healy Sept. 14, 2015 Donald J. Trump has criticized Carly Fiorina’s looks , saying of his only female Republican rival: “Look at that face! Would anybody vote for that?” He has said that listening to Mrs. Fiorina’s voice gives him a “massive headache.” He has mocked her business career, and has gleefully declared how “viciously” she was fired by Hewlett-Packard. On Wednesday, Mr. Trump will share a stage with Mrs. Fiorina for the first time, in the second Republican presidential debate . Political strategists warn male candidates to use caution when debating against a female rival. But never before in American presidential politics has a candidate who has drawn accusations of sexism and bullying been forced to personally confront the female recipient of his insults on live television. And with Mrs. Fiorina bragging that she is getting under Mr. Trump’s skin, their showdown is emerging as one of the most intriguing subplots of the second debate. In the first Republican debate last month, Mr. Trump defended having called women “fat pigs” and “disgusting animals,” and he later implied that the moderator, Megyn Kelly of Fox News , had asked him tough questions because she was menstruating, a comment that got him disinvited from an influential conservative gathering where Mrs. Fiorina gave a rousing speech. Video When men and women face off in political debates, the tone of some jabs can come off as condescending or sexist. Published On Sept. 14, 2015 Credit Image by Scott Olson/Getty Images Mrs. Fiorina stood out in the “undercard” of the first Republican debate, and since then she has edged up in polls to earn a spot on the main stage with Mr. Trump. But the presence of the two has prompted concern — and a lot of curiosity — in a party eager to take on Hillary Rodham Clinton and worried about how Mr. Trump will fare in debating against a woman. “I’m not going to call her honey,” Mr. Trump said in an interview last week. But he added of Mrs. Fiorina: “Look, she’s only got 3 percent in the polls, so in order to get recognition, I think she’ll start hitting me. So I think she’s fair game.” Mr. Trump said he was preparing to criticize the record — and not the appearance — of Mrs. Fiorina, who was fired as the chief executive of Hewlett-Packard and, like Mr. Trump, has never held elected office. “I want to talk about her corporate history, her failures at Hewlett-Packard,” Mr. Trump said. “And that will be damaging enough to her.” The usual rules of decorum have so far not applied to Mr. Trump, whose standing in the polls has only increased after incendiary comments about women, immigrants and Senator John McCain’s war record. But while his derision of two opponents — Jeb Bush (“low energy”) and Gov. Scott Walker of Wisconsin (“failed governor”) — has coincided with their decline in the polls, Mrs. Fiorina has gained ground as Mr. Trump has showered insults on her. Image Supporters listening to Mrs. Fiorina in Dover, N.H., on Saturday. Mrs. Fiorina’s poll numbers have risen in the last month. Credit Ian Thomas Jansen-Lonnquist for The New York Times Mrs. Fiorina responded to Mr. Trump’s comments in Rolling Stone  magazine (“Can you imagine that, the face of our next president?”) by telling Fox News, “Maybe, just maybe, I am just getting under his skin a little bit because I am climbing in the polls.” Mr. Trump eventually said that he was referring to Mrs. Fiorina’s “persona” when he made the remarks about her face. Mrs. Fiorina, 61, has said that, as a successful woman, “you’re either a bimbo or you’re the other b-word,” and that “there is no glass ceiling.” She is often defensive when asked about whether her gender has helped her get ahead, and yet she has seized on her position as the only woman in the 16-person Republican field. Mrs. Fiorina started her long-shot candidacy by taking direct aim at Mrs. Clinton, but she now appears poised to be the best candidate to bring out the side of Mr. Trump that has drawn accusations of misogyny — a tactic some Republicans hope Mrs. Fiorina will embrace on Wednesday. “Instead of shutting him down, there’s a way to pat poor Donald, the chauvinistic pig, on the head,” said Rob Stutzman, a Republican strategist in Sacramento. Who’s Winning the Presidential Campaign? History suggests that each party’s eventual nominee will emerge from 2015 in one of the top two or three positions, as measured by endorsements, fund-raising and polling. Sept. 16, 2015 Mr. Trump said he would not be chauvinistic. “I wouldn’t do that; I won’t do that,” he said. “Though, if I did — well, people would just hit me with political correctness, which, again people are so tired of.” In the first undercard debate, Mrs. Fiorina seemed prepared and calm under pressure. Her rivals treated her mostly with respect or deference, but the stakes will be higher on Wednesday. Mrs. Fiorina and her supporters aggressively lobbied CNN to alter its criteria for picking candidates for the next Republican debate, securing a spot for her on the main stage. “This is going to be a defining moment in Carly’s career,” said Boris Feldman, a Silicon Valley lawyer and one of her supporters. “What’s selling tickets to this is the Trump-Carly card,” he said. “Trump has a thing about anybody questioning him, but especially a woman.” Mr. Feldman and others close to Mrs. Fiorina expect her to portray Mr. Trump as not being a real Republican, and to call out his inconsistent positions on economic and social issues. Mrs. Fiorina has a bare-bones campaign staff and has been preparing for the debate by adjusting her standard responses and zingers to fit into the succinct format. She works mostly in a sunny room of her Colonial-style Virginia home with her husband, Frank, and their two Yorkshire terriers, Max and Snickers, nearby, and she communicates with aides on a speaker phone. Mrs. Fiorina declined to comment for this article. Political strategists on both sides advised Mrs. Fiorina either to ignore any potentially sexist attacks by Mr. Trump or to engage him in a way that is different from what the men onstage do. “If I were her, I would have a little fun with Trump,” said former Representative Patricia Schroeder of Colorado, who sought the Democratic presidential nomination in 1988. She suggested that Mrs. Fiorina cover her face with her hand and say, “I don’t want to upset or distract you, Donald, if my face really bothers you.” Debating female candidates can be perilous even for men who do not have Mr. Trump’s reputation for insulting women, which includes calling a female lawyer “disgusting” after she took out a breast pump, and joking about oral sex with a female contestant on NBC’s “The Celebrity Apprentice.” As Joseph R. Biden Jr., a senator at the time, prepared for his vice-presidential debate against Gov. Sarah Palin of Alaska in 2008, he received some very clear rules from his advisers, according to several people who helped him plan: Don’t correct her, don’t belittle her, don’t mock or diminish her. Image Carly Fiorina at a Republican event in Chichester, N.H., on Saturday. Mrs. Fiorina’s looks were criticized by Donald J. Trump. Credit Ian Thomas Jansen-Lonnquist for The New York Times “ Carly Fiorina is a better debater than Governor Palin, and she has a great capacity to take on Donald Trump,” said former Gov. Jennifer M. Granholm of Michigan, who played Ms. Palin in Mr. Biden’s mock debate sessions. Mr. Trump’s plan to attack Mrs. Fiorina’s corporate record could make an effective impression. Voters know little about the layoffs during her rocky tenure at Hewlett-Packard or about her $21 million severance package, something that Senator Barbara Boxer of California highlighted in their 2010 Senate race. Ms. Boxer defeated Mrs. Fiorina by 10 percentage points. “They’ll understand pretty quickly that she is the face of income inequality and Wall Street greed,” Ms. Boxer said in an interview. (Mrs. Fiorina has said the layoffs and her subsequent firing were reflective of the bold leadership she brought to the company.) Deborah Bowker, a close friend and an aide to Mrs. Fiorina, said that after years of being surrounded by men in corporate America, Mrs. Fiorina was unfazed by Mr. Trump. “This isn’t the first time she’s been confronted by someone making a crazy comment,” Ms. Bowker said. “She has had comments about her looks, her clothes, whatever.” That is at least one point on which Mr. Trump and Mrs. Fiorina can agree. “I think she’s a strong woman,” he said in the interview last week. “She can handle any criticism of her, and she can defend herself.”  Find out what you need to know about the 2016 presidential race today, and get politics news updates via Facebook , Twitter and the First Draft newsletter . A version of this article appears in print on , on Page A 17 of the New York edition with the headline: Sharing a Stage, Trump and Fiorina Will Face Complicated Challenges . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Related Coverage Cheers, Puns and Protest Welcome Donald Trump in Dallas Sept. 14, 2015 Image Democrats Lay Groundwork to Expand Use of ‘Super PACs’ Sept. 14, 2015 Image The Republican Candidates Donald Trump Has Hurt the Most Sept. 14, 2015 Image Show All Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              