   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Business Day Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by American Apparel Hires New Interim Chief Executive By  Hiroko Tabuchi Sept. 29, 2014 The troubled retailer American Apparel named a new interim chief executive on Monday in a bid to move on from a public battle with its founder and former chief, Dov Charney. The company said Scott Brubaker, a managing director at the turnaround firm Alvarez & Marsal, would temporarily take the label’s helm as it looked for a more permanent leader. American Apparel stunned investors, and Mr. Charney himself , by firing him in June from leadership roles at the company, accusing him of personal and professional misconduct, including misuse of company funds and failure to stop the publication of naked photographs of a former employee who had sued him on sexual harassment claims. Mr. Charney’s lawyer has called those accusations baseless, and his ouster illegal. Mr. Charney, who had been sued by several female employees who said they had been sexually harassed, remains at American Apparel as a consultant and has fought to regain control of the company. Over the last few years, American Apparel has struggled financially, losing more than $100 million last year. And the company’s stock has slumped by almost 80 percent over the last five years. In the latest quarter, through June, the last reporting period largely under Mr. Charney’s leadership, the company narrowed its losses to $16.2 million. But it continued to face extra costs and lost revenue from problems with inventory caused by a newly opened distribution center in La Mirada, Calif. The American Apparel brand, which won an ardent following for its edgy T-shirts, spandex leggings and risqué advertising, is losing cachet among young shoppers, who prefer to spend their hard-won dollars on cheaper offerings from retailers like H&M and Forever 21. Image Scott Brubaker will temporarily take American Apparel's helm as it looks for a more permanent chief executive. American Apparel, which has sought to buck industry norms by manufacturing its clothing in the United States, is finding it increasingly difficult to compete purely on price — though the company says its disadvantages are more than made up for by the quality of its garments and its factories’ ability to react more quickly to trends. Shortly after his dismissal, Mr. Charney teamed up with the New York investment firm Standard General to acquire about 43 percent of American Apparel’s shares. In July, the American Apparel board, Mr. Charney and Standard General struck a deal to shore up the company’s finances and remake the board. The board now includes a Standard General partner, and for the first time in the company’s history, two women. Any future role for Mr. Charney depends on the findings of an internal investigation into claims of misconduct at the company, expected next month. Neither American Apparel nor Standard General has committed to allowing Mr. Charney back into any position of authority. Mr. Charney has also agreed to give up the right to vote his shares without Standard General’s consent. Mr. Brubaker has served interim management roles and advised in the reorganization of retail and consumer products companies, including Eddie Bauer and Sunshine Biscuits, according to Alvarez & Marsal’s website. Before joining the firm, he was director at the turnaround practice of Arthur Andersen, the defunct accounting firm. Alvarez & Marsal, a major turnaround consultant that took over the management of Lehman Brothers after its Chapter 11 filing, was hired by American Apparel this month. In a phone interview, Mr. Brubaker stressed that the company still had “a strong underlying business.” He also reaffirmed his commitment to keeping American Apparel’s manufacturing headquarters in Los Angeles. He stressed his caretaker role, however, saying that his mandate was not to shape the turnaround but to safely hand the reins over to a more permanent successor, after a search that is expected to take several more months. American Apparel also named Hassan Natha as chief financial officer, replacing John Luttrell. Mr. Luttrell, who had also been interim chief executive since Mr. Charney’s removal, is leaving the company. He joined American Apparel in 2011 from a management consulting firm, following stints as chief financial officer at retailers including Old Navy and Wet Seal. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page B 4 of the New York edition with the headline: American Apparel Hires Interim Chief With Turnaround Expertise . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Related Coverage Times Topics page on American Apparel For Dov Charney of American Apparel, an Abrupt Fall From Grace June 19, 2014 Image American Apparel Deal Gives Retailer a Lifeline July 9, 2014 Image American Apparel Narrows Its Losses, but Troubles Remain Aug. 18, 2014 Image Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              