   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Television Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Review: ‘Crazy Ex-Girlfriend,’ a Musical With Twisted Songs Image “Crazy Ex-Girlfriend,” a musical series on CW, stars Rachel Bloom as a lawyer who follows an old crush without his knowledge. Credit Eddy Chen/CW By  James Poniewozik Oct. 11, 2015 When you talk about the state of TV comedies, it’s important to separate that from the state of TV sitcoms. There’s no shortage of laughs, from the artisanal sketches of “Portlandia” to the interdimensional dysfunction of “Rick and Morty” to the lacerating comedy-drama of “Orange Is the New Black.” It’s the traditional broadcast network half-hour that feels tired. Maybe, the CW network seems to be suggesting, it just needs a little more time — 30 minutes, to be exact. Last year, the CW introduced the season’s biggest comedy innovation, the hourlong mock-telenovela “Jane the Virgin,” which returns on Monday. The same night, it’s introducing a companion hour, “Crazy Ex-Girlfriend,” a romantic comedy with a twisted song in its heart. Two songs, actually, in the pilot. “Crazy Ex-Girlfriend” is a TV musical , proving that after “Glee” and “Empire” the stigma of “Cop Rock” is well and truly dead. The show’s star, Rachel Bloom (also its co-creator, with the screenwriter Aline Brosh McKenna of “The Devil Wears Prada”), broke out on YouTube with a string of nerdily raunchy music videos, including an R-rated proposition to the science-fiction author Ray Bradbury . (Kids, get your parents’ permission before Googling it.) The premise: girl meets boy, girl loses boy, girl goes on hellbent cross-country journey a decade later to get boy back. Rebecca Bunch (Ms. Bloom), a successful and miserable young corporate lawyer in Manhattan, runs into Josh Chan (Vincent Rodriguez III), an old summer camp crush who’s about to move back home to West Covina, Calif. Seizing Josh, or the idea of him, like a musclebound life raft, she quits her job and — unbeknown to him — follows him to California. Cue the strings: “Ex-Girlfriend” scores Rebecca’s arrival to an old-school, skirt-twirling production number that contrasts her fantasy with suburban reality. As she steps out of a cab, beaming, she’s greeted by a sign spinner for a pornographic bookstore. She finds a new job, gets an apartment and begins tracking her target, partly by cozying up to Josh’s bartender friend, Greg (Santino Fontana). As the title makes no pretense of hiding, “Crazy Ex-Girlfriend” is playing with some tricky stereotypes of obsessive women. But it’s also conscious that it’s playing with them. I’m guessing that this will be the only TV series this year with a rap interlude that contains the adjective “patriarchal.” Smartly, the pilot grounds Rebecca’s fixations in more than guy-craziness. She was pushed into law by her mom (not seen, but heard in a series of hectoring voice-mail messages), and she dealt with her parents’ ugly breakup by acting out. There’s a reference to a past suicide attempt, although her mother dismisses it: “You didn’t even break your skin!” Seen this way, Rebecca’s not a nut job but a survivor, and the effervescent Ms. Bloom plays her with intelligence; if she’s deluded, it’s because she’s smart enough to fool herself. The script is less consistent, though, and some of the digs at the exurban setting feel condescending. But the early hits outweigh the misses. As Rebecca primps for a date, she launches into “ The Sexy Getting Ready Song ,” a spot-on R&B spoof of the “makeup tax” women pay in time, effort and blood. (Don’t ask.) It’s equal parts the “Inside Amy Schumer” boy-band parody “ Girl, You Don’t Need Makeup ” and what the male folk-comedy duo Flight of the Conchords might have written if they waxed and wore Spanx. That last comparison worries me, though. The Flight of the Conchords’ brilliant HBO series of the same name ran for only two seasons, largely because of the burden of churning out that much funny, original music. “Ex-Girlfriend,” if it survives, will have many more hours to fill every year. (Ms. Bloom has songwriting help from Adam Schlesinger of Fountains of Wayne and the producer Jack Dolgen.) And we’ll see if the risqué humor — more “Avenue Q” than “42nd Street” — can survive the transition to broadcast. (The pilot was originally shot for Showtime.) Still, this is a show about willing yourself, even past reason, to hope. Amid an overly cautious fall crop of network series, it could just be crazy enough to work. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page C 6 of the New York edition with the headline: Girl Meets Boy. Girl Follows Boy. Boy Has No Idea. . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Related Coverage The Great American Musical, Side B, in ‘Crazy Ex-Girlfriend’ Oct. 7, 2015 Image Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              