   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index New York Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by William Bratton, New York’s Influential Police Commissioner, Is Stepping Down Video Mayor Bill de Blasio and Commissioner William J. Bratton announced Tuesday that Commissioner Bratton will step down from his post next month. Chief James P. O’Neill will replace him. Published On Aug. 2, 2016 Credit Image by Dave Sanders for The New York Times By  J. David Goodman and Al Baker Aug. 2, 2016 William J. Bratton, the commissioner of the New York Police Department and the most widely recognized face in American policing, will step down next month to take a job with a private advisory firm, ending a 45-year career in public life that spanned the country, from Boston to Los Angeles, and that reshaped the image of what a police commander could be. The timing of Mr. Bratton’s departure and the choice of his successor were made final only on Monday evening, and the details remained under wraps until just a couple of hours before the official announcement on Tuesday afternoon at City Hall. In detailing the change in leadership, Mayor Bill de Blasio emphasized “continuity,” and Mr. Bratton highlighted a “seamless transition.” But like every previous change atop the Police Department, the nation’s largest force, the news raised a host of questions about its direction. Mr. Bratton’s departure comes at a time when police agencies around the country are under intense pressure to address questions about racial bias and the excessive use of force. “Policing is never done; it’s always unfinished business,” Mr. Bratton said, speaking last in a kind of valedictory address. “The issues that we’re facing now are going to require years to resolve.” Mr. Bratton said his departure in September would also be his exit from public service. At the news conference, he and city officials repeatedly declined to disclose what his new job would be. But on Tuesday afternoon, Teneo Holdings, a company that advises corporate executives around the world, announced that he would join the firm as senior managing director and become the executive chairman of Teneo Risk, a new division of the company. The company would not divulge details of his compensation package. Mr. Bratton, 68, will be replaced by the Police Department’s top uniformed officer, Chief James P. O’Neill, a veteran New York commander who became an officer in 1983 and has a long relationship with Mr. Bratton, dating to their time together in the city’s old transit police force. Chief O’Neill, 58, at times visibly emotional as he spoke at the news conference, said he had been told he was the mayor’s pick only 16 hours before. Image William J. Bratton, at lectern, with Mayor Bill de Blasio at a news conference on Tuesday. Credit Dave Sanders for The New York Times “Never in my life, coming on this job in 1983, did I think I’d be standing at the podium talking to everybody as the next police commissioner,” said Chief O’Neill, his mother and sister before him in front-row seats. “We never stop trying to drive down crime and quell disorder; I’m going to do it in lock step with the people we’re dedicated to protect. It is, after all, what we do now.” The choice of Mr. O’Neill, virtually unknown outside law enforcement circles, ended two decades of almost continuous stewardship of the department by Mr. Bratton and Raymond W. Kelly, two towering figures who exerted enormous influence over local politics and national policing, even as they occasionally sparred. “The leadership of the N.Y.P.D., from Kelly to Bratton, has been too personality-driven,” said City Councilman Ritchie Torres, a Bronx Democrat who advocates police reform. Mr. Torres said he hoped a commissioner with a lower profile would be “more accountable to the democratically elected branches of government.” “Gone are the days of the imperial police commissioner,” he added. In his two and a half years as commissioner, Mr. Bratton oversaw the largest expansion of the Police Department in more than two decades, with the addition of 1,300 officers last year, and the creation of large cadre of militarized officers equipped with assault rifles and body armor. With Mr. de Blasio’s support and Mr. Bratton’s advocacy, the department has benefited from bigger budgets, new patrol cars and bulletproof vests, and smartphones in the hands of all officers. The director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, James B. Comey, and district attorneys and elected officials across New York City praised Mr. Bratton’s tenure on Tuesday. “He will be sorely missed,” Mr. Comey said in a statement. Without Mr. Bratton at the helm, Mr. de Blasio, a Democrat, may find himself under more pressure to advance reforms, which many advocates say have stalled, and less insulated from criticism on law enforcement issues. Although crime in the city has continued to go down on Mr. de Blasio’s watch, New Yorkers in polls have expressed unease about public safety, a source of frustration for the Police Department and City Hall. The leadership of the department is still contending with a federal corruption investigation that has already ensnared several top commanders. And federal prosecutors are still weighing charges in the 2014 case of Eric Garner, who died after a police officer put him in a chokehold. “The trust gap and the empathy gap sadly persists,” said Donna Lieberman, the executive director of the New York Civil Liberties Union. “And I think that’s because Bratton has stubbornly held on to the philosophy of ‘broken windows’ policing.” The announcement removed the question of succession from Mr. de Blasio’s re-election bid next year. But it introduced new ones: Can Chief O’Neill, who is grounded in the culture of the Police Department, enact the changes the mayor has promised? How will the police-reform advocates who supported Mr. de Blasio’s run in 2013 see the new commissioner: as an ally or an adversary? Will Mr. de Blasio lose support among black and Hispanic voters for once again appointing a commissioner who is white? Chief O’Neill’s career stalled under the former commissioner, Mr. Kelly, who removed him from his narcotics command in 2008 amid a scandal involving officers who paid informants with drugs in exchange for information. But after Mr. Bratton’s return in 2014, Chief O’Neill found his star rising. He was quickly promoted to chief of patrol and then to chief of department that year. Shortly before the announcement at noon, Mr. de Blasio made a flurry of calls to alert key officials, including Representative Hakeem Jeffries, a Brooklyn Democrat. “I told him there will be some people who will be concerned that a diverse candidate was apparently not seriously considered, but I find Chief O’Neill to be a good man,” Mr. Jeffries said. Mr. Bratton, at the news conference on Tuesday, beamed at Chief O’Neill and praised Mr. de Blasio. “We have a passion for what government can do, what policing can do,” he said of his relationship with the mayor. Calling himself a “proud adopted son of New York City,” Mr. Bratton said that “it’s now time to move on.” (He said he would remain a city resident with his wife, Rikki Klieman.) The change came earlier than expected; Mr. Bratton said in an interview last month that he would not stay into a second term if Mr. de Blasio were re-elected next year. Mr. Bratton has said the choice of when to go was his alone. The selection of Mr. Bratton in 2013 was one of Mr. de Blasio’s first major appointments after being elected, and it was seen at the time as bolstering the new mayor’s law-and-order credentials after a campaign in which he pointedly criticized the Police Department for heavy-handed practices in black and Hispanic neighborhoods. Mr. Bratton embraced the chance to once again lead the nation’s largest police force after having been pushed out of the job in 1996 after 28 months by Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani, a Republican. The departure this time, on his own terms, will come after 32 months as commissioner. Since then, Mr. Bratton has served as a key adviser and surrogate for Mr. de Blasio at some of the rockiest moments of his first term in office, especially after rank-and-file officers turned their backs on the mayor at the funerals for two officers in December 2014 and January 2015 and engaged in a de facto work slowdown. Yet they often read different scripts, even when defending the same core policy — a dedication to so-called broken windows policing — that Mr. Bratton’s critics contend is at the heart of the divide between the police and minority communities. Even as Mr. de Blasio defended the approach on Tuesday, referring to it as “quality-of-life enforcement,” he said the department’s future success would be determined by a new iteration of so-called neighborhood policing, rolling out across the department. “It will change everything,” the mayor said. Mr. Bratton, who began as a beat cop in Boston in 1970, said his career as a police leader was finished. But his enduring legacy, defined by aggressive efforts to fight crime in New York City in the 1990s, may be defined by how well his reforms this time — to solve entrenched problems of racial tension and mistrust that have plagued the police in Los Angeles, New York and across the nation — take hold. Mr. de Blasio said that he had an “intense bond” with Mr. Bratton and that Chief O’Neill was “the perfect person” to succeed him. Mr. Bratton’s departure did not — for the moment, at least — prompt an exodus among the department’s command staff. John J. Miller, the deputy commissioner for intelligence and counterterrorism and a longtime confidant of Mr. Bratton’s, is staying on, Mr. Bratton said, as is Benjamin B. Tucker, the first deputy commissioner. Carlos M. Gomez, the chief of patrol, will succeed Chief O’Neill as chief of department. Correction :  An article on Wednesday about the resignation of the New York City Police commissioner, William J. Bratton, misstated when the funerals of two slain police officers took place. They were in December 2014 and January 2015, not December 2013. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page A 1 of the New York edition with the headline: Bratton Is Out as Police Chief for New York . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Related Coverage As Bratton’s Successor, O’Neill Is Rising to Critical Job at Key Time Aug. 2, 2016 Image James O’Neill, Officer Since 1983, Will Step Into Police Dept.’s Top Job Aug. 2, 2016 Image Bratton, Who Shaped an Era in Policing, Tries to Navigate a Racial Divide July 25, 2016 Image Show All Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              