   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Real Estate Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Living In Sleepy Hollow: Surrounded by History, and Legends Living in Sleepy Hollow, N.Y. 15 Photos View Slide Show  › Image Byron Smith for The New York Times By  Anne Mancuso Sept. 28, 2016 Sleepy Hollow has become a big deal at Halloween. Street signs promoting holiday events in the village — which was immortalized in Washington Irving’s short story “The Legend of Sleepy Hollow” — and in neighboring towns start popping up right after Labor Day. “We just bought our tickets to ‘The Great Jack O’Lantern Blaze ,’ ” said Jenny McMahon, 31, as she and her husband, Dennis, 33, visited the village’s 1883 lighthouse last month. They plan to go to a performance of “Irving’s ‘Legend,’  ” too. The couple bought a $650,000 four-bedroom split-level in the Philipse Manor section last year, moving from Downtown Brooklyn because of rising rent and their wish for “more space and an actual yard,” Mrs. McMahon said. They like the “down-to-earth” quality of the village , she said, and their easy commutes into Manhattan — she works in marketing downtown and he is a lawyer in Midtown. They’re also pleased that many of their neighbors are young city transplants like them. In his eight years as village administrator, Anthony Giaccio has seen “an explosion of our tourism” that “we definitely think is a plus for the village.” Mr. Giaccio said another change has been the start of a development project at the 68-acre riverfront site of the former General Motors plant. Called Edge-on-Hudson , it will have 1,177 housing units as well as shops, restaurants, a hotel and a river walk. Forty units of affordable housing will be included, he said, with 21 more earmarked for village employees. Image 157 MERLIN AVENUE A six-bedroom four-and-a-half-bath Victorian with eight fireplaces on 0.47 acre, listed at $1,475,000. (914) 391-4179 Credit Byron Smith for The New York Times A hot topic among residents is the development of an additional 28 acres donated by General Motors. Proposals for the site include more recreational facilities and a new public works building, Mr. Giaccio said. The subject was discussed at a recent village meeting, where residents voiced concerns about traffic and suggested that the site include an outdoor performance space and a skate park. Mark Scaglione, 16, asked for bocce and badminton courts. Later, away from the microphone, he said, “What kids really want is a Starbucks.” The village’s economic and cultural diversity and access to the city drew Meghan Raderstrong, 29, an elementary schoolteacher and her husband, Jeff, also 29, a foundation executive. They will close this month on a three-bedroom colonial in the Webber Park section, relocating from Washington D.C. Despite being a native of nearby Hawthorne, Ms. Raderstrong said she had not spent much time in the river towns. “Once the contract was signed, we read ‘The Legend of Sleepy Hollow,’ ” she said. She and her husband are looking forward to taking the train to the city, having heard “how beautiful the train ride is along the Hudson.” What You’ll Find Sleepy Hollow, a village of about 10,000 in the town of Mount Pleasant, sits on 5.1 hilly square miles along the Hudson River, about 30 miles from Midtown Manhattan. Around half the village’s population is Hispanic, according to the 2010 census. Buildings along Beekman Avenue house food stores and services like a tailor. Housing stock includes colonials, splits and Tudors with older homes on 0.10 acre grouped around Beekman Avenue, said Henry Steiner, the managing broker of Steiner Real Estate Associates. Single-family homes on slightly larger lots can be found in Webber Park, while those on one-third to one-half acre line the streets of Philipse Manor and Sleepy Hollow Manor. Condominiums include those in two developments at the Hudson River: Ichabod’s Landing and the River House. As for rentals, Mr. Steiner said the monthly rent for a two-bedroom apartment typically runsabout $2,100. What You’ll Pay Ten houses on the market in late August ranged from a three-bedroom 1975 colonial on 0.12 acre listed at $549,000 to a four-bedroom1848 estate on 2.95 acres at nearly $3 million, according to Michele R. Gonzalez of Julia B. Fee Sotheby’s International Realty. Three multifamily houses ranged from $345,000 to $559,000. Eight condos ranged from $550,000 for a one-bedroom to $2.2 million for a three-bedroom. There is a small co-op complex in the village, but it had no sales as of late August, she said. An analysis provided by Mrs. Gonzalez, using data from the Hudson Gateway Multiple Listing Service, showed the median sales price of single-family homes for the 12-month period ending Aug. 25 was $728,750, an increase of almost $100,000 from the previous year. The median for one-to-three-bedroom condos was $743,500, an increase of more than $143,000 from the previous year, which had few condo sales. The Vibe There is “lots to do,” said Mrs. Gonzalez, who lives in the village and describes it as “a recreation community.” The Old Croton Aqueduct draws hikers, bird-watchers and cyclists, as does the Rockefeller State Park Preserve in nearby Pleasantville, though biking there is limited. Kingsland Point Park , a waterfront park owned by Westchester County and maintained by the village, has picnic tables, playing fields, grills, a promenade and a footbridge leading to an 1883 lighthouse that is open on select Sundays. Places to visit along Route 9 include the Old Dutch Church of Sleepy Hollow and the Sleepy Hollow Cemetery , the resting place of Washington Irving,William Avery Rockefeller Jr., Andrew Carnegie and Harry and Leona Helmsley. Philipsburg Manor, a 1750-era living history museum, is Image 5 FARRINGTON AVENUE A four-bedroom three-bath split-level on 0.25 acre, listed at $619,000 (914) 263-5275 Credit Byron Smith for The New York Times part of Historic Hudson Valley , as is Kykuit, the former Rockefeller estate that is partly in nearby Pocantico Hills; Kykuit tours leave from the Manor. Readings, workshops and other events are sponsored by the Hudson Valley Writers’ Center at the old station house at the Philipse Manor Metro-North station. Dining spots include the Bridge View Tavern  and Beer Garden ; and, in Pocantico Hills, Blue Hill at Stone Barns . The Schools About 3,000 students from Sleepy Hollow and Tarrytown are served by the Tarrytown Union Free School District , along with a few from other districts. The Sleepy Hollow High School and Middle School campus serves 1,468 students. Prekindergarten and kindergarten are at the John Paulding School; first and second grades at W.L. Morse School; and third to fifth at Washington Irving Intermediate School. Average 2016 SAT scores at Sleepy Hollow High were 491 in reading, 489 in math and 491 in writing, compared with state averages of 489, 501 and 477. The Commute The trip on Metro-North’s Hudson Line from Philipse Manor to Grand Central Terminal is around 40 to 60 minutes at peak times. Monthly tickets are $300. The History Originally home to the Weckquaesgeek Indians, the area was called Slapershaven or Sleepers’ Haven by the Dutch. Once part of the estate of the merchant Frederick Philipse, it was incorporated as North Tarrytown in 1874, four years after the incorporation of Tarrytown. A referendum in 1996 changed the name to Sleepy Hollow.  For weekly email updates on residential real estate news, sign up here . Follow us on Twitter: @nytrealestate . A version of this article appears in print on , on Page RE 8 of the New York edition with the headline: Surrounded by History, and Legends . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              