   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Art & Design Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Art Review Asia Week’s Rare and Unusual Objects for Art Lovers and Collectors Image A view of the exhibition “A Giant Leap: The Transformation of Hasegawa Tohaku” at Japan Society. Credit Richard Goodbody By  Will Heinrich March 14, 2018 Equal parts trade fair, arts festival and synergistic marketing opportunity, New York’s Asia Week , March 15-24, involves auctions at Bonhams , Christie’s , Doyle and Sotheby’s ; scores of appointment-only private dealers opening their doors to the public; and tied-in museum shows as far afield as Newark , Princeton , N.J., and Stony Brook , N.Y. The Metropolitan Museum alone has seven related shows (one of which Jason Farago of The New York Times recently reviewed ). The week’s overall vibe is more collectible than critical, but that’s not a disparagement — the city is briefly full of rare and unusual objects you might never get to see again. The extremely partial list that follows contains two of the most important exhibitions and a handful of interesting gallery shows to pique your interest — but do yourself a favor and pick up a map . JAPAN SOCIETY Image “Pine Trees” (2008) by Tohaku. Credit Tokyo National Museum The exhibition “ A Giant Leap: The Transformation of Hasegawa Tohaku ” focuses on the life and legacy of Tohaku (1539-1610), one of 16th-century Japan’s artistic and technical innovators . The quality of the color in his “Pine Trees,” a pair of large painted screens that comprise one of the best known and most beloved works in Japanese art history, varies from shocking black to watery, almost imperceptible gray. You can never forget that you’re looking at ink, but at the same time the spontaneity and delicate precision of the shapes means you can’t quite identify a brush stroke even in the darkest, most scribbly tip of a branch poking out of the mist. “Pine Trees” itself doesn’t travel outside Tokyo — the Japan Society instead borrowed the Tokyo National Museum’s own high-quality replica. But the rest of the works in what is incredibly Hasegawa’s first-ever exhibition in the United States are once-in-a-lifetime loans that will rotate halfway through the show’s run because they can’t be shown for more than 26 days in a row. “Eight Views of Xiao and Xiang,” the painter’s white and black on gold treatment of a traditional Chinese landscape subject, is anchored in one corner by craggy, snow-covered hills that look like ocean breakers and in the other by a tiny village in a grove of gnarled trees. Between them clouds of white play deceptively intricate games with streaks of unpainted gilding. Here, a fisherman pushing a skiff turns the gold into a lake’s surface and the white into a mist hanging heavily above it; there, a temple’s projecting roof makes the gold read simply as a shadowed furrow in an unbroken cloud cover. Through April 8 (first rotation); April 12 to May 6 (second rotation), 333 East 47th Street; 212-715-1258; japansociety.org. ASIA SOCIETY Image Long Life deity floats against a background of a thousand-odd tiny doppelgängers in “Unknown Tibet: The Tucci Expeditions and Buddhist Painting” at the Asia Society. Credit Museum of Civilisation-Museum of Oriental Art “ Unknown Tibet: The Tucci Expeditions and Buddhist Painting ” is on view here through May 20. When the scholar and Himalayan adventurer Giuseppe Tucci was exploring the Tibetan plateau between the World Wars, traditional culture was already disappearing quickly. More than 60 years after China’s invasion, it evokes a strange mix of feelings to file past enormous prints of the anthropological documentation by the five photographers he brought along: It’s both painful and reassuring to think how easily physical artifacts can outlast the cultures that make them. Tucci also collected prints, maps, manuscripts, and hundreds of religious paintings. A gorgeous red and black Long Life deity floats against a background of a thousand-odd tiny doppelgängers, most of them in a grid, but a few of which float across his knee and under his arm. Fourteen 17th-century paintings of arhats are vividly realized and still brightly colored, impressive syntheses of individual detail and intense formal stylization. Their mossy green backgrounds double as realistic mountainscapes and hallucinogenic cloudscapes. Once you’ve settled back to earth, pop upstairs to “ In Focus: An Assembly of Gods , ” through March 25, an entertaining early 19th-century colored ink painting that captures the Chinese tendency to religious syncretism in one hyperbolic pantheon of divinities from Shakyamuni Buddha and the Jade Emperor down to the five animal-headed Commissioners of Pestilence. 725 Park Avenue; 212-288-6400; asiasociety.org . GALLERIES Image Stoneware by Wada Morihiro at Joan B. Mirviss. Credit Richard Goodbody Several angular pots by Wada Morihiro (1944-2008), one of the three major 20th-century Japanese ceramic artists to which her current show is dedicated, are on compact but extraordinary display at Joan B. Mirviss , incised with complex patterns and painted in a striking combination of black, white and red slip accented with green glaze. 39 East 78th Street, suite 401; 212-799-4021; mirviss.com. The highlight of the mirror-themed show of woodblock prints at Scholten Japanese Art is a group of elegant women primping by Ito Shinsui, one of several Taisho-era artists to revive the use of glittering powdered mica as a pigment. 145 West 58th Street, suite 6D; 212-585-0474; scholten-japanese-art.com. Flat jade discs called bi were a staple of Chinese ritual art for most of its history, but the two notched triskelions in the ancient jade show at J.J. Lally & Co. Oriental Art , both nearly five millenia old, are much more unusual. 41 East 57th Street, 212-371-3380; jjlally.com. If you missed the spectacular show of Japanese bamboo at the Met, TAI Bamboo Art , visiting from Santa Fe at Jason Jacques, has a brief recap which includes two quietly unforgettable baskets — one with a sharply angled skirt, the other with an extra-long handle — by Hayakawa Shokosai V. 29 East 73rd Street, 212-535-7500; jasonjacques.com. The winsome group of celadons, or vessels with a green, iron-based glaze, assembled by the ceramics dealer Eric Zetterquist , includes a gorgeous, gourd-shaped 11th-century Korean vase. Ask to see the back, where a modern Japanese owner filled in some unfortunate cracks with lacquer and powdered gold ( kintsugi ). 3 East 66th Street, #1B; 212-751-0650; zetterquist.com. A show of abstract ink drawings by the contemporary Taiwanese calligrapher Huang I-Ming at M. Sutherland Fine Arts vividly demonstrates at large scale the unlimited textural and tonal possibilities of black ink on white paper. 7 East 74th Street, 3 fl.; 212-249-0428; msutherland.com. Asia Week Through March 24 at various locations; asiaweekny.com .  A version of this article appears in print on , on Page C 15 of the New York edition with the headline: Rare and Unusual Objects Come Calling . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              