   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Opinion Supported by Killing Obamacare Softly By  Thomas B. Edsall July 27, 2017 Image Enrollment assistance in Miami. The Trump administration has cut the enrollment period in half. Credit Joe Raedle/Getty Images Unable — at least so far — to kill the Affordable Care Act outright, the Trump administration has conducted a sustained war of attrition designed to inflict fatal damage on Obamacare. This war, often operating below the radar, entails the use of a quintessentially conservative strategy , and the cooperation of Congressional Republicans. In a way, it’s pretty simple: You cut the budget, impose debilitating regulations, track the subsequent missteps and then attack the program as a failure. The political opportunism behind the Republicans’ determination to undo legislation that makes federally financed health care more broadly available has deep roots. “Democratic legislation,” the conservative strategist Bill Kristol argued after President Bill Clinton proposed his health care plan in 1993, poses “a serious political threat to the Republican Party.” If enacted, Kristol continued, it will relegitimize middle-class dependence for “security” on government spending and regulation. It will revive the reputation of the party that spends and regulates, the Democrats, as the generous protector of middle-class interests. And it will at the same time strike a punishing blow against Republican claims to defend the middle class by restraining government. Sound familiar? The Kristol memo captures the reasoning and the philosophy behind the many covert (and overt) Republican attempts to eviscerate Obamacare. “There’s a clear pattern of the administration trying to undermine and sabotage the Affordable Care Act,” Elizabeth Hagan, an associate director at Families USA, a liberal advocacy group, told The Associated Press. “It’s not letting the law fail, it’s making the law fail.” Over its first six months in office, the Trump administration has used its power to dismantle the A.C.A. limb by limb — to halve the enrollment period, to reduce the value of many of the A.C.A. insurance plans and, somewhat spectacularly, to use Obamacare funds to finance a public relations drive against it. Most recently, with little fanfare, the Trump administration terminated contracts for health care “ in person assisters ” in 18 cities, including Chicago, Dallas, Cleveland, Miami and Philadelphia. These “assisters” are personnel trained to guide Obamacare applicants through the multipart A.C.A. enrollment process. In April, the Trump administration issued a “ Rule to Increase Patients’ Health Insurance Choices for 2018 ” that effectively reduces the value of an Obamacare linchpin, the premium tax credit. In an email, Sarah Lueck of the nonpartisan Center on Budget and Policy Priorities, explained that this “rule allows insurers in the individual market to offer plans with higher deductibles and out of pocket costs in 2018 than have been permitted previously.” Because of this, “the rule is likely to reduce the premium tax credit for many people.” A premium tax credit is a federal subsidy that consumers can use to lower their monthly health insurance payments. A study the center conducted in February outlines the damage that this rule inflicts on Obamacare by reducing federal subsidies. It found that it would “raise premiums, out-of-pocket costs, or both for millions of moderate-income families.” In addition, the rule would reduce the amount of health care that marketplace plans have to cover. That would allow individual-market insurers to offer plans with higher deductibles and other out-of-pocket costs than they can now sell through the marketplaces. Most important, according to the center’s analysis, is the covert aspect of the rule which has the hidden impact of reducing the Affordable Care Act’s premium tax credits, which help moderate-income marketplace consumers afford health care. As a result, the rule would force millions of families to choose between higher premiums or worse coverage. Louise Norris, one of the founders of the Colorado Health Insurance Insider , has mapped out the Republican strategy in an online essay, “ 10 ways the GOP sabotaged Obamacare .” The attacks began on day one, March 23, 2010, when the A.C.A. was signed into law. Fourteen state Attorneys General, 13 of them Republicans, filed suit challenging the constitutionality of the mandate requiring individuals to buy health care coverage. The sole Democratic Attorney General involved, Buddy Caldwell of Louisiana, switched into the Republican Party in 2011. On June 28, 2012, the Supreme Court affirmed the constitutionality of the individual mandate but in a blow to the program, Norris wrote, it also ruled that the federal government could not withhold Medicaid funding from states that did not expand Medicaid. This had the effect of making the ACA’s Medicaid expansion optional, which has, in turn, hobbled the ACA’s progress in many states. The rejection of Medicaid expansion by 19 states — all controlled by Republican governors or legislative majorities or both — to cover individuals making up to 138 percent of poverty level income meant that these individuals had to turn to “ Health Insurance Marketplaces ” or “private insurance risk pools.” The addition of low income, Medicaid-eligible individuals in these 19 Republican states to the private A.C.A. insurance market added a less healthy and more expensive-to-insure population to the pool. Faced with more a costly clientele, insurance companies increased premiums. This gave Republicans new ammunition to charge that Obamacare premiums were rising. A 2014 measure sponsored by Senator Marco Rubio, Republican of Florida, capped government spending to protect insurance companies against financial losses. It, too, weakened Obamacare. The Rubio amendment, Robert Pear wrote in The Times , demonstrated “the effectiveness of quiet legislative sabotage.” The assault on the program has continued unabated, including in this recent tweet by Tom Price, the secretary of health and human services: Perhaps most significant among Republican sabotage efforts was the decision by House Republicans to file suit in 2014 challenging the constitutionality of “cost sharing reductions” — payments made by the federal government to insurance companies in order to lower premiums for those making less than 250 percent of poverty income. It is these payments that make health care affordable for moderate-to-low-income Americans. The suit went before Rosemary Collyer, a George W. Bush appointee on the Federal District Court in Washington, D.C. In May, 2016, Collyer ruled in favor of the House Republicans, declaring that although Congress had authorized the subsidies, there had never been a specific appropriation. Collyer did allow the federal government to continue making the payments while the decision is under appeal. Trump has warned that he may drop the appeal and end the subsidies — both of which he can do unilaterally — to deliver what Politico called “an immediate and fatal blow to the Obamacare marketplaces.” “The best thing politically is to let Obamacare explode,” Trump told The Washington Post on March 24. The program is “totally the property of the Democrats” so that “when people get a 200 percent increase next year or a 100 percent or 70 percent, that’s their fault.” Survey data suggests that Trump may be wrong about whom the public would blame. The Kaiser Family Foundation tracking poll asked voters in June whether Trump and Republicans or President Obama and Democrats would be “responsible for any problems with” the Affordable Care Act “going forward?” By nearly 2-1 voters said Trump and Republicans in Congress would be responsible, 59-30, a view shared even by Republicans, 56-35. For the moment, the Trump administration has chosen to keep the subsidies in a legal limbo, putting off a decision on whether to persist with the appeal and continue paying out the subsidies. By taking this ambiguous position, Trump has heightened uncertainty about the future of Obamacare, and that uncertainty has itself become a major factor in weakening the program . On June 21, for instance, Anthem , one of the largest Obamacare providers, announced that in 2018 it would pull out of markets in Wisconsin and Indiana, following a similar announcement two weeks earlier that it would drop coverage in Ohio. Anthem declared that planning and pricing for ACA-compliant health plans has become increasingly difficult due to a shrinking and deteriorating individual market, as well as continual changes and uncertainty in federal operations, rules and guidance, including cost-sharing reduction subsidies and the restoration of taxes on fully insured coverage. On cue, Paul Ryan, the House Speaker — and, long before Trump took office, a leader of the efforts to undercut Obamacare — declared : Obamacare is clearly collapsing, and we have to step in before more families get hurt. We are on a rescue mission to replace this collapsing law with a better system so that people have lower costs, more choices, and real peace of mind. We need to get this done. Needless to say, a better, cheaper system failed to materialize. There is no stronger voice maligning Obamacare than Tom Price. His Twitter feed launches one attack after another. He retweeted this @FoxBusiness tweet: The Health and Human Services Department has the legal responsibility for administering the Affordable Care Act, but under Price the department serves as a key administration weapon in efforts to discredit the A.C.A. The department has produced 12 videos intensely hostile to Obamacare. All are available to the public on YouTube. In an email to me, Tim Gronniger, deputy chief of staff and the director of delivery system reform at the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services during the Obama administration, characterized one of the videos as “shot through with misinformation” and “major falsehoods.” In the Senate this week, new Republican bids to ax Obamacare have failed, with as many as seven Republicans joining a unified Senate Democratic caucus to reject proposal after proposal. The Republican defections have embittered Trump. At 7:13 a.m. on Wednesday, the president tweeted: In the event of ultimate failure on the Senate floor, Trump and the Republican Congress will keep up their subterfuge and continue their underhanded way of making and unmaking policy. Whether the A.C.A. can survive the administration’s strategy of death by 1,000 cuts, whether any plan delivering quality health care at an affordable price could survive a relentless assault like this, remains an open question.  I invite you to follow me on Twitter, @Edsall .  Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter (@NYTopinion) , and sign up for the Opinion Today newsletter . Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              