   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Movies Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by A Self-Appointed Herald of Hip-Hop in China Image Tsalta Baptiste in a subtitled scene from the online trailer for the unauthorized and unproduced film “Until the End of Time.” Credit Steven Sheng By  Tal Pinchevsky Jan. 8, 2016 Almost from the moment he moved from California to Shaoxing in China’s Zhejiang Province in October 2014, Tsalta Baptiste enjoyed a sense of notoriety. That happens when you’re an African-American man suddenly living in a nation with a population of more than 1.3 billion. Mr. Baptiste’s passing resemblance to Kobe Bryant also helped in a country that reveres the Los Angeles Lakers star. But it’s his mission to introduce China to America’s hip-hop culture and a trailer for an unauthorized Tupac Shakur biopic that have earned Mr. Baptiste global notoriety. “Hip-hop isn’t even really American to them in China,” Mr. Baptiste said in an online phone conversation from his home in Shaoxing. “There are large quantities of people who do know, but most people don’t.” Mr. Baptiste, 27, grew up listening to Shakur, Nas and Jay Z. But since he moved to China, to complete his master’s degree in international development, he has encountered Chinese students who seem to think the music stems from Korean pop. Mentions of the rap stars he idolized typically draw blank stares. That unfamiliarity inspired Mr. Baptiste to introduce rap pioneers to the Chinese, and the resulting Shakur project became an international online fascination. To make the trailer, Mr. Baptiste drew on his varied show business background. At 9, he was a member of a boy band looking to ride the crest of popular young R&B acts of the time, like Immature and Soul for Real. Mr. Baptiste said that the group was buoyed by a financial stake from the ventriloquist Shari Lewis, and that when she died, in 1998, the band effectively died with her. But Mr. Baptiste never gave up on performing. “Ever since then, I made up in my mind that I’m meant to do this,” he said. Turning his efforts to acting, Mr. Baptiste appeared in independent films as an undergraduate at Texas Southern University and spent a month studying abroad in Beijing. Academia sent him back to China when he enrolled in the master’s program at Concordia University in Irvine, Calif. He has since appeared in a variety of Chinese commercials and promotional videos, most notably for the school where he teaches English. Image Tsalta Baptiste, right, the star of an online trailer for an unauthorized biopic about Tupac Shakur, with a friend, Fang Kewei, in China. Credit Dean Xue Mr. Baptiste occasionally injects African-American culture into his lessons, but the trailer for “Until the End of Time,” named for a posthumous Shakur album, was something else entirely. The video tells the story of a rebellious Chinese boy writing a school report about the rapper, eventually befriending a woman who claims to be an old Shakur acquaintance. Before long, the boy finds a kindred spirit of sorts in the rap legend, who was killed in 1996 and is played in flashbacks by Mr. Baptiste. The actor also helped finance and produced the project, working closely with a young Chinese filmmaker and friend, Steven Sheng. “We kind of formulated this kid’s story with the influence of Tupac being a rebel and how the two of them could come together,” Mr. Baptiste said. They never completed the biopic. “We filmed just enough to put together a trailer,” he said. “But the main thing was to get the point across, for people to get intrigued.” He uploaded it to YouTube and China’s equivalent site, Youku, in late October. It would be a month before the Internet discovered it, and the responses ranged from confused but encouraging to confused but harsh. “We can’t knock the filmmaker’s passion there, but it’s definitely weird,” the blog LAist concluded. Brooklyn Vegan , the music website, described it as “pretty psychotic,” while the pop culture site Vulture asked simply, “What Is This Random Chinese Tupac Biopic?” The video received more than 135,000 YouTube views before the Universal Music Group demanded that it be taken down. The trailer didn’t get quite the same response in China. “I already knew it wasn’t going to be well received” in China, where just a few thousand watched it, he said. “If we had a Taylor Swift look-alike in there, then it would have done really well. They love Taylor Swift in China.” Still, Mr. Baptiste was satisfied with the outcome. Chinese viewers “saw it, and it did its job.” he said. “They know about it now.” (There was a slight flurry of Shakur-related film projects in 2015. The trailer’s removal from YouTube coincided with news that the production company Morgan Creek had hired the music video director Benny Boom to make a Shakur biopic that had been stalled for years. That film, tentatively titled “All Eyez on Me,” will star Demetrius Shipp Jr. And in the summer Marcc Rose played the rapper in the N.W.A biopic “Straight Outta Compton.”) Additionally, he has been emboldened by the attention the trailer received. He has begun production on a similar project centered on the Wu-Tang Clan. “I’m doubling down,” he said, adding that he envisions several more projects. “I’m going to keep on promoting these things and pushing these things in China,” he said, “because it has to be done. The people in China need to know about this kind of stuff, because nobody else is teaching them about it.” A version of this article appears in print on , on Page AR 14 of the New York edition with the headline: Heralding Hip-Hop Online in China . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              