   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Economy Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Common Sense Why a Media Merger That Should Go Through Might Not Video “From a regulatory standpoint – classic anti-trust analysis – this is kind of a no-brainer,” said James Stewart of The Times, “It’s classic vertical integration.” Published On Oct. 24, 2016 Credit Image by CNBC By  James B. Stewart Oct. 25, 2016 Opponents of the proposed AT&T purchase of Time Warner don’t want to just block the $85.4 billion deal: They want to overturn decades of antitrust policy and case law. Until recently, that would have been all but unthinkable. But in today’s superheated and politically charged environment, they may just succeed. Politicians were piling on this week to criticize the deal, including Donald J. Trump; Tim Kaine, the Democratic nominee for vice president; and Senators Bernie Sanders of Vermont and Al Franken of Minnesota. Still to be heard from is Senator Elizabeth Warren of Massachusetts, a prominent foe of corporate consolidation. A younger generation of antitrust scholars who are rethinking the nation’s fundamental approach to antitrust law may prove even more influential. “Over the last 40 to 50 years, antitrust law has evolved to be almost completely indifferent to vertical mergers,” said Tim Wu, an antitrust and internet expert at Columbia Law School who coined the phrase “net neutrality” and recently wrote “The Attention Merchants” on the advertising business. In vertical mergers, a company buys a supplier; in horizontal mergers, direct competitors combine. But the new generation harks back to the original trustbusters of the early 20th century, who were most concerned about preventing corporations from gaining too much power. “The antitrust system as it stands is focused on prices to consumers, innovation and efficiencies,” Mr. Wu said. “That reflects the triumph of the University of Chicago school of economics. But there’s an older tradition, embodied by Supreme Court Justice Louis Brandeis, that says a concentration of too much power in too few hands is bad for democracy and bad for consumers.” Scott Hemphill, an antitrust and intellectual property professor at New York University School of Law, agreed. “Vertical deals rarely get prohibited outright,” he said. “Modern antitrust case law has pretty much kept politics out of the analysis.” “But is antitrust law only about economics, or does enhanced political power play a role?” Mr. Hemphill asked. “Would a combined AT&T and Time Warner put too much power in one company? That’s the big question.” It’s a question AT&T says it is prepared to answer. “If someone is looking for a test case to overturn the time-honored judicial precedents of vertical mergers, this is not the case,” David R. McAtee II, AT&T’s general counsel, told me this week. “What we have here is a classic vertical merger that will benefit consumers in an environment that’s begging for innovation.” Given antitrust precedents, it’s no wonder AT&T and Time Warner would expect regulatory approval, even if they have to accept some conditions imposed by the government. Time Warner is so confident the deal will be approved that it negotiated a paltry breakup fee (by megamerger standards) in the event it’s blocked: just $500 million. At nearly every opportunity, Randall L. Stephenson, AT&T’s chief executive, and other architects of the deal have repeated the “vertical” mantra. As Mr. Stephenson told me this weekend, “This is strictly a vertical merger. We’re combining with one of our big suppliers. You’d be hard pressed to find a vertical merger denied by the regulators. They won’t give us a free pass, but we expect that if they have concerns, they’ll impose conditions to address them.” Mr. Stephenson is right about that. Time Warner is just one of many content suppliers to AT&T, albeit an important one. Time Warner competes vigorously with other film and television studios, cable networks, and producers of news and entertainment. AT&T’s History of Invention and Breakups AT&T, once known informally as Ma Bell, is a storied American brand that goes back under a succession of names to the late 19th century, after Alexander Graham Bell invented the telephone. Feb. 13, 2016 AT&T competes in cable delivery systems, satellite and wireless. While more concentrated than news and entertainment (there are just four major wireless carriers), they are still competitive markets. This isn’t a “horizontal” American Airlines-US Airways merger (which inexplicably passed antitrust review) or even the earlier 21st Century Fox bid, which Time Warner rebuffed in part because of antitrust concerns. Since neither firm competes with the other one, merging the two would have little or no effect on market concentration. And the deal’s architects are promising a bevy of virtues for consumers, from more wireless video access to lower prices. Case closed? Thanks in large part to groundbreaking books in the 1970s by the Supreme Court nominee and Yale Law School antitrust scholar Robert Bork (“The Antitrust Paradox”) and Richard Posner (now an influential judge on the Seventh Circuit Court of Appeals) at the University of Chicago Law School (“Antitrust Law”), vertical mergers came to be viewed as usually promoting competition and, by extension, consumer welfare. The view was embraced by the Supreme Court and embedded in the Justice Department’s vertical merger guidelines during the Reagan administration. Vertical merger challenges aren’t unheard-of, but few have been blocked entirely. A Georgetown University Law Center study found 46 vertical enforcement actions in the 20-year period from 1994 to 2013, including a 1994 suit to block AT&T’s acquisition of McCaw Cellular Communications, a groundbreaking deal that paved the way for AT&T’s entry into wireless communication. (AT&T completed the merger after reaching a consent decree with the Justice Department.) The proposed Comcast-NBC Universal deal set off an avalanche of criticism from rival media companies and consumer advocates who argued that it consolidated too much power in one company. In 2011 the Justice Department sued to block the deal on grounds it had the potential to disadvantage competitors that delivered video services, such as satellite broadcasters and telecom companies, and emerging online video providers like Netflix. In an opinion that has no doubt been closely scrutinized by AT&T’s antitrust lawyers at Arnold & Porter, a federal judge ruled that the conditions Comcast accepted to ease the regulator’s concerns “will provide a prompt, certain and effective remedy for consumers by diminishing Comcast’s ability” to “harm competition.” Whether that has indeed been the case will no doubt be the subject of intense scrutiny by regulators. “It’s important to assess how well the NBC consent decree has done,” Mr. Hemphill said. “On the face of things, online video seems to be thriving. But has Comcast engaged in troubling behavior as a result of owning NBCUniversal? That’s an important question for thinking about this deal.” Susan P. Crawford, a professor at Harvard Law School and author of “Captive Audience: The Telecom Industry and Monopoly Power in the New Gilded Age,” was an influential voice in encouraging regulators to oppose the proposed Comcast-Time Warner Cable merger. She predicted the same fate for AT&T-Time Warner. “I think this is unlikely to be approved,” she said. “There were very few public benefits to the Comcast/NBCU deal, which should not have gone through. It’s difficult even to identify a public benefit for this one.” Mr. McAtee of AT&T said it would “be fundamentally inconsistent and unfair” for the government to reject AT&T’s deal for Time Warner after it approved the Comcast NBC Universal merger. “We feel we have an even stronger case,” he added. “Comcast was a dominant, entrenched cable and broadband provider, and NBC Universal had big broadcast licenses in an ecosystem where over-the-top video was still in its infancy. Yet the government approved the deal with conditions. On all counts, we have a stronger case for approval.” AT&T and Time Warner executives will have many months to make their argument to consumers, Congress, regulators and the White House. But there’s a risk they will find themselves in the midst of a revolution in antitrust thinking that transcends any one case. “It’s interesting that both presidential candidates have said they’d take a close look at this,” Mr. Wu said. “So one of the first tests for the new president will be where they come down on this: Will it be Louis Brandeis or the University of Chicago?” A version of this article appears in print on , on Page B 1 of the New York edition with the headline: Why a Merger of Media Firms That Should Be a Sure Bet Isn’t . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Related Coverage AT&T Cheerleading Squad for Merger: Nearly 100 Lobbyists Oct. 25, 2016 Image One Last Growl for F.C.C.’s Sharp-Toothed Watchdog Oct. 25, 2016 Image Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              