   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Fashion & Style Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by A Daytime Dance Party That Celebrates Black Diversity Image Belania Daley, center, dancing at an Everyday People party on Memorial Day at Output in Williamsburg, Brooklyn. Credit Jackie Molloy for The New York Times By  Jennifer Miller July 17, 2017 They wore lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender slogans, and cowboy fringe, polo shirts and jackets bedazzled with Swarovski crystals. There were Afros and head wraps, and bodies covered in body paint or nothing at all. They danced to layered, percussive beats, the music vibrant and pulsing. “I’m bubbling inside, but I’m trying to act calm,” said Tolulope Oye, 21, a student at the Fashion Institute of Technology, who wore yellow track pants embroidered with the words “Never Forget Where You Came From.” As a Nigerian immigrant growing up in Columbus, Ohio, she had dreamed of attending this party since she was a teenager. “I’ve been looking for the perfect niche,” she said, “and I think I found it today.” Image Partygoers gathering on Memorial Day at Output in Williamsburg for an Everyday People event. Credit Jackie Molloy for The New York Times It was the Memorial Day edition of Everyday People , a socially conscious daytime party that celebrates the African diaspora, held at Output , a club in Williamsburg, Brooklyn. Started in 2012 as a monthly brunch on the Lower East Side, the parties now draw thousands and are held in other cities, including Birmingham, Ala., and Chicago, as well as in Africa and the Caribbean. The mission is to celebrate the diversity of black culture — African and American, immigrant and first generation — through community, music and food. It is designed to be a safe space, a proud space, a space to be anything you want to be, said Saada Ahmed, 29, the party’s creative director and a model for brands like J. Crew and Nike. “People can put their guard down,” Ms. Ahmed said. “You go to the South and you see L.G.B.T.Q. kids knowing they can be themselves and no one will hurt them. Daytime parties mean Muslim women” — Ms. Ahmed included — “feel more comfortable.” Image Donae’O, left, and D.J. Rich Knight during the Memorial Day party at Output. Credit Jackie Molloy for The New York Times “Celebrating ourselves is definitely a political act,” she added. “It’s important to release all the pain.” Image From left, Jahmar Francis, Luzette Andrews, Ebony Williams and Reign Apiim at Output. Credit Jackie Molloy for The New York Times It wasn’t so long ago that Ms. Ahmed, who grew up in Atlanta, was new to New York, arriving on a Chinatown bus with no job and few connections. Like many of the young people who now flock to her parties, she was driven to prove herself. Between various sales and production assistant gigs, she started hanging out with East African creative types and eventually met her future partners: Roblé Ali, a chef who later starred in a Bravo reality show, “ Chef Roble and Company ,” and Mohamed Hamad , an electrical-engineer-turned-D.J. Image Rony Byas getting a little help from a friend at the Everyday People party. Credit Jackie Molloy for The New York Times Ms. Ahmed, Mr. Ali and Mr. Hamad wanted to create a social event for their community, so in 2012, they started a brunch party at the Hotel on Rivington , where one of Mr. Hamad’s friends managed the food and beverage. “There were great parties at Bagatelle and Lavo, but they didn’t really appeal to our group of people, our group of friends,” Mr. Ali, 33, said. “A lot of these people are millennials that are striving and may not have hit their financial stride.” Though he and Mr. Hamad were already established in their careers, Ms. Ahmed, who then did online sales for Phillip Lim, was not. “I felt lost,” she said. “I didn’t think I was good at anything.” Working with Mr. Hamad and Mr. Ali gave her confidence. Soon 150 people were coming in for brunch. “And they didn’t want to leave at 5 p.m., so we went until 8,” Mr. Ali said. Eventually, the parties became too big for the hotel, so they were moved a block south to the DL , a three-story event space on nearby Delancey Street. Image About 1,800 people attended the Everyday People event on Memorial Day. Credit Jackie Molloy for The New York Times Today, Ms. Ahmed, Mr. Ali and Mr. Hamad collaborate with the Brooklyn Museum and the New York City Parks Department to hold Everyday People events. In recent months, the partners have organized events in Atlanta and Charlotte, N.C. But three New York-based parties form the core of the business: a hip-hop and R&B event at the Watermark Bar on South Street, a Caribbean-influenced party at La Marina in Upper Manhattan, and an African music dance party at Output. The Output party drew about 1,800 guests on Memorial Day and showcased African dance music by Electrafrique , a dance party based in Dakar, Senegal. OkayAfrica , a media platform featuring African music and culture, was a sponsor. “There’s a whole musical wave out of Nigeria, Ghana and South Africa being played in nightclubs all over the world and setting trends,” Mr. Hamad said. “In the past two or three years, I’ve been able to make a living playing the music I love.” The rising popularity of Afrobeats, Mr. Hamad said, is symbolic of the growing popularity of African culture among African-Americans, which is recognized not just by those who attend Everyday People parties, but by brands like Bacardi, Nike and Samsung that are marketing to them. Zandile Blay , 34, a journalist from Jersey City and the editorial director of OkayAfrica, recently spent time in Nigeria. It was the first time, she said, that she saw “en masse so many smart, well-educated, focused, vibrant, happy, stylish youth that looked like me.” The first time she witnessed a similar scene in the United States was at an Everyday People party. “It makes me realize that magic — that black magic — is not only on the continent,” she said. “At this party, you get to see this is real and it’s happening in America.”  Continue following our fashion and lifestyle coverage on Facebook ( Styles and Modern Love ), Twitter ( Styles , Fashion and Weddings ) and Instagram . A version of this article appears in print on , on Page D 5 of the New York edition with the headline: Celebration of African Diversity Resonates in New York and Beyond . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              