   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Corrections Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Corrections: October 23, 2016 Oct. 23, 2016 T MAGAZINE: THE GREATS An article on Page 174 this weekend about the artist Kerry James Marshall, who shows the writer Wyatt Mason around derelict areas of his Chicago neighborhood, gives an outdated name for the city’s Sears Tower. It was renamed the Willis Tower in 2009. • An article on Page 168 this weekend about Lady Gaga and her new album, “Joanne,” misstates the surname of her family. It is Germanotta, not Gemanotta. (She was born Stefani Joanne Angelina Germanotta.) • An article on Page 132 this weekend about the journalist Ta-Nehisi Coates’s new foray into comic-book writing with the series “Black Panther” misspells the given name of a writer Coates has helped recruit to work on a companion series. She is Roxane Gay, not Roxanne. SUNDAY BUSINESS Because of an editing error, an article last Sunday about the wealthy businessman Andrew E. Sabin’s contradictory stance of supporting both action to thwart climate change and the presidential aspirations of Donald J. Trump referred imprecisely to when Mr. Sabin joined the Army reserve. It was in the late 1960s, not “in the years after World War II.” The article also misidentified an environmental group that generally backs Democrats. It is the Natural Resources Defense Council Action Fund, not the N.R.D.C. itself. • An article in the special Mutual Fund Quarterly section last Sunday about the strongest-performing mutual funds misstated the expense ratio for the institutional shares of the Hood River Small-Cap Growth Fund. It was 1.09 percent, a net figure that accounts for fee waivers and expense reimbursements by the fund company, not 1.49 percent, which is the gross expense ratio. SUNDAY REVIEW An opinion essay last Sunday about sex omitted one of the developers of the Our Whole Lives sex education program. It was developed by the Unitarian Universalist Association and the United Church of Christ, not the Unitarian Universalist Church alone. • A column by Ross Douthat on the religious right last Sunday erroneously attributed a quotation to Ben Carson. Mr. Carson has argued that religion on occasion has to take a back seat to politics, but he did not say, “Sometimes you put your Christian values on pause to get the work done.” BOOK REVIEW A review on Oct. 9 about “The Populist Explosion: How the Great Recession Transformed American and European Politics,” by John B. Judis, overstated George Wallace ’s performance in presidential polls when he was a third-party candidate in 1968. He drew close to the Democratic nominee, Hubert H. Humphrey, in late September (21 percent to Humphrey’s 28 percent, according to the Gallup Organization), but he did not lead Humphrey in the polls “until October” (or at any time). THE MAGAZINE An article on Oct. 2 about the Obama administration’s failure to take on corporate agriculture misattributed a quotation in the publication Agri-Pulse about the agriculture industry’s gearing up for “a pre-emptive strike against a long list of new regulations” expected from the Obama administration. A corn-industry spokesman — not Agri-Pulse — said: “We’ve seen so many attacks. We see Michael Pollan go on Oprah. What’s going to happen when those people . . . start to have an impact in Washington on policies and regulations?” The article also misstated the year Agri-Pulse published the quotation. It was 2010, not 2009. • An article on Oct. 16 about Hillary Clinton misspelled the given name of the author of a book that she mentioned called “Amusing Ourselves to Death.” He is Neil Postman, not Neal. SUNDAY STYLES Because of an editing error, the Scene City column last Sunday, about the N.A.A.C.P.’s 80th anniversary benefit, referred incorrectly to Reginald Van Lee. He was one of the chairmen of the benefit, not its chairwoman. • An article last Sunday about making (and unmaking) plans referred imprecisely to a study on scheduling leisure time. While it was conducted at Washington University in St. Louis, the study was by Gabriela Tonietto and Selin Malkoc, who were researchers there at the time; the study was not by the university’s Olin Business School. • An article on Oct. 2 about Tiffany Trump transposed the given and last names of a reporter who once interviewed Ms. Trump. She is Carson Griffith, not Griffith Carson. • An article on Sept. 25 about Laura Wasser, the Los Angeles divorce lawyer hired by Angelina Jolie following her separation from Brad Pitt, misspelled the middle name of one of the Hollywood producer’s Brian Grazer’s former wives. She is Gigi Levangie Grazer, not Gigi Lavangie Grazer. TRAVEL An article on Oct. 9 about Art Deco Los Angeles quoted incorrectly from comments by the author Marlyn Musicant about the design of Union Station. She said that by utilizing bronze chandeliers, the architects wanted “a more modern influence,” not “a more Spanish influence.” • The Q. and A. column last Sunday, about the Marriott-Starwood deal, misstated the amount that Marriott International paid for Starwood Hotels & Resorts. It was $13 billion, not $13 million. • An article last Sunday about a grand tour of Switzerland, using information from a guide, misidentified a village in the canton of Graubünden. It is Grevasalvas, not Maienfeld. The article also characterized incorrectly the relationship of the village to the book “Heidi.” Grevasalvas was a location for the TV show based on the book, not the inspiration for the book. VOWS A listing of highlights about the wedding of Cassandra Ilich and Shaun Reed, featured in the Vows column last Sunday, misstated the number of stones in her engagement ring. It has nine stones, not seven. • A report on Oct. 9 about the wedding of Dyan Yu and Dong Joo Lee erroneously referred to Mr. Lee as “Mr. Yu” in one reference. The Times welcomes comments and suggestions, or complaints about errors that warrant correction. Messages on news coverage can be e-mailed to nytnews@nytimes.com or left toll-free at 1-844-NYT-NEWS (1-844-698-6397). Comments on editorials may be e-mailed to letters@nytimes.com or faxed to (212) 556-3622. Readers dissatisfied with a response or concerned about the paper’s journalistic integrity may reach the public editor at public@nytimes.com or (212) 556-7652. For newspaper delivery questions: 1-800-NYTIMES (1-800-698-4637) or e-mail customercare@nytimes.com . A version of this article appears in print on , on Page A 3 of the New York edition with the headline: Corrections . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              