   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by The Web of Deals That John Malone Weaves Video John Malone, Liberty Media chairman, talks with David Faber of CNBC, about consolidation among the big and small media players. Published On Nov. 12, 2015 By  Leslie Picker Nov. 12, 2015 The media mogul John C. Malone is never one to shy away from complicated deals. Two announcements from his companies on Thursday — involving tracking stocks, spinoffs and tax efficiencies – exemplify how he can spin an intricate web of investments. Mr. Malone’s Liberty Interactive Corporation, known for its digital commerce businesses, said in a statement that it would spin off two units in its Liberty Ventures Group. One of them will consist of the CommerceHub, which provides technology services to e-commerce merchants, and the other will be Liberty Expedia Holdings, which will include the company’s 18 percent stake in the travel-booking site Expedia and Bodybuilding.com , a fitness site. In a separate statement, the Liberty Media Corporation also said it planned to reclassify its common stock into three tracking stocks. The first will be the Liberty Braves Group, which owns the Atlanta Braves baseball team and related assets. Another tracking stock will be for the Liberty Sirius Group, which includes the satellite radio provider Sirius XM Holdings. The Liberty Media Group will get the remainder of Liberty’s investments, such as its stakes in Live Nation Entertainment, Time Warner and Viacom. The Liberty Media Group will also have about a 20 percent interest in Liberty Braves. The motivation behind the spinoff announced on Thursday was to help “unlock value” for Liberty Ventures shareholders, according to Gregory B. Maffei, president and chief executive of Liberty Interactive. The transaction, advised by JPMorgan Chase, is expected to be tax-free to stockholders. Mr. Maffei said in the statement that the purpose behind the three tracking stocks was to “highlight each tracking stock group’s operations, and the financial performance of its attributed assets, provide greater investor choice, and enable targeted capital raising while maintaining an optimal capital structure for Liberty.” Mr. Malone, who serves as chairman of both Liberty Media and Liberty Interactive, has built an empire by investing in technology, media and telecommunications companies, or outright acquiring them. Two days ago, Mr. Malone’s Liberty Global and Discovery Communications, where he is the biggest shareholder, said they had each acquired a 3.4 percent stake in Lions Gate Entertainment. He also helped coordinate Charter Communications’ acquisition of both Time Warner Cable and Bright House Networks this year. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page B 7 of the New York edition with the headline: Spin Cycle . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Related Coverage Liberty Global and Discovery Communications Take Stakes in Lions Gate Nov. 10, 2015 Image The ‘King of Cable’ Behind a Charter-Time Warner Cable Deal May 26, 2015 Image Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              