   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Sunday Review Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Opinion Supported by Gaming: The System By  Ben Yagoda Mr. Yagoda’s most recent book is “The B Side: The Death of Tin Pan Alley and the Rebirth of the Great American Song.” April 28, 2018 Image Credit Jackie Ferrentino I had to buy two items at CVS — a bottle of mouthwash for me and some red yeast rice pills for my wife. I plucked the Listermint from the shelf, took it to the cashier and gave her my phone number and a $10 bill. The 38 and 1/16th-inch-long receipt had just what I was hoping for: a coupon for $5 off a purchase of $15 or more, expiration date three days later. I headed straight for the vitamin section, where the economy-size house-brand red yeast rice was on sale — buy one for $22.99, get one free. I brought my two containers to the same cashier, who took the coupon and unjudgingly charged me $17.99. But wait, there’s more. I’d get the equivalent of 2 percent of that price back in CVS Rewards bonuses for future purchases, and 1.75 percent in cash via my credit card rewards program, a total of 67 more cents to my name. Am I pitiful or what? Don’t answer that question. Or at least don’t answer it till you hear me out. My CVS behavior is just one data point suggesting that I’m the precise person for whom the marketing strategy of “gamification” is intended. That is, saving some money on vitamin supplements is nice, but that’s not really what brought me to the drugstore. I was there for the buzz, the shots of happy I got when the cash register spit out a receipt the length of a 4-year-old. It’s all in the game. I’ve long been aware of these tendencies of mine but didn’t realize just how many of them there are, and how much they affect what I do, until I did an inventory recently. The gaming actually starts first thing in the morning, when I shamble over to the scale and get a digital readout of my “score.” Down is a win, up is a loss — but I can hedge against the latter in the afternoon, when I climb on the elliptical machine and score over 400 (calories, that is). Which reminds me that the Fitbit Charge 2 on my wrist not only displays my heart rate at any given moment but also keeps track daily of hours slept, calories burned, steps taken and stairs climbed. A couple of my little games are arguably beneficial to the world at large. About a year ago, my utility company started providing monthly feedback on households’ energy use, compared with neighbors in comparable houses, with particularly efficient neighbors in comparable houses and with one’s own use the previous year. The latest statement says our house used 11 percent less than the average of all our neighbors — ping! — and 4 percent less than we did in the same period last year, but 23 percent more than those annoying efficient neighbors. My work is cut out for me. I monitor cumulative miles per gallon on my Ford C-Max Hybrid, 43.5 at the moment. Further, every time I brake to a stop, I get a score based on how much energy I allowed to fritter away by too-slammy braking; coming to a very gradual stop elicits a 100 and hearty “Congratulations!” on the dashboard. With my intricate credit-card protocol, however, I edge from borderline pathetic but ecologically friendly into, I fear, pathological. I have already mentioned the 1.75 percent cash-back bank card. But depending on the circumstances, I’ll use one of six other cards, which provide me with benefits ranging from a 5 percent discount (Target purchases with a Target card) to 2 percent cash back (restaurant purchases with my second bank card). The catch: All the benefits except the Target discount have to be claimed, which I don’t always do, meaning I’m giving “breakage” back to the companies. I learned that term in “The Gamification Revolution ,” by Gabe Zichermann and Joselin Linder. It’s one of several recent books to explore how game practices and principles have been and can be applied in a lot of other areas. The book and some others — including “Reality Is Broken,” by Jane McGonigal — put my vigorous gaming in context and taught me that companies like CVS know exactly what they’re doing. In Mr. Zichermann and Ms. Linder’s terms, the company has established a rapid feedback game, which works pretty much like a slot machine, without the bells and whistles and with the stipulation that you always win … something. The books also helped me understand the particular kind of game that animates this trend, and my behavior. It’s not a zero-sum, winners-and-losers sort of game, like Monopoly or cage fighting, but rather one that continues as long as you want to play and one that, in a sense, you can’t win. Ms. McGonigal calls this an “infinite” rather than “finite” game and gives the example of Tetris. You will flail around and be crushed eventually, but you can attain small triumphs along the way, maybe even achieve a personal best, and in any case you can always embark on a new game, no quarter required. The only computer game I play, the bubble-bursting Bubble Bazinga, has exactly this model. In the same way, I can’t “beat” the credit card companies, but merely continue to accumulate modest savings from moment to moment. Then I die. My gamified life may be nutty and sad, but it doesn’t hurt anyone. At least that’s what I thought until a few months ago, when my new car insurance company, Liberty Mutual, invited me to join a program its website describes this way: “Using a small device that observes your driving habits, we’ll notice the safe choices you’re making on the road and reward you for them.” The company promised a rate reduction of at least 5 percent and up to 30 percent, based on driving performance over a three-month period. Best of all, an app would let me track the size of my discount in real time. If you’ve read this far, you know what my answer was. I quickly learned that the key “driving habits,” as far as Liberty Mutual was concerned, were jack-rabbit starts and sudden stops. Eliminating the starts proved easy, but braking was a problem. When a car pulled in front of me, I slowed down gradually enough for my C-Max to register approval. But when I got home, I saw the app had dinged me for it, dropping my discount by a percentage point. It got in my head. Subsequently, I found myself laying off the brake and drifting perilously close to vehicles, all with the goal of keeping my discount percentage up. It had come down to this: safety versus the game. Clearly, things had gone too far. I told myself that saving a couple of hundred dollars on car insurance wasn’t worth losing my life, and I started going to the brake more assiduously. My apparent eagerness to risk life and limb to save a couple of bucks a month had led me to reflect further. Had I essentially let my rat-like impulse for buzzes turn me into a Mario Brother? Well, yes. But I told myself the Liberty Mutual experience had taught me a lesson, or at least a goal: I control the game, the game doesn’t control me. With that in mind, I think I’m past the point of no return. For me, the ungamified life is not worth living. Ben Yagoda is the author, most recently, of “The B Side: The Death of Tin Pan Alley and the Rebirth of the Great American Song.”  Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter (@NYTopinion) , and sign up for the Opinion Today newsletter . A version of this article appears in print on , on Page SR 9 of the New York edition with the headline: Gaming: The System . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              