   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Book Review Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Essay Why Arthur Schlesinger’s ‘Disuniting of America’ Lives On Image The historian Arthur M. Schlesinger Jr., who tackled the canon wars a generation ago. Credit Ted Thai/The LIFE Picture Collection, via Getty Images By  Michael Lind Nov. 2, 2017 In contemporary debates that involve history and historical symbols like the controversies over the removal of Confederate statues from public parks or the place of Andrew Jackson and Alexander Hamilton on United States currency, it may seem impossible to find middle ground. But a generation ago in the 1990s the search for common ground in the history wars was undertaken by the leading liberal historian of his era, Arthur M. Schlesinger Jr., in “ The Disuniting of America: Reflections on a Multicultural Society ,” published in 1991 and in a revised edition in 1998. From 1949, when he published “The Vital Center,” Schlesinger, one of the founders of Americans for Democratic Action and a confidant of the Kennedys, sought to defend his conception of centrist liberalism against the radical left as well as the right. The title of “The Disuniting of America” might mislead contemporary readers into assuming that the book is about social polarization in general, which is the subject of more recent publications like Bill Bishop’s “The Big Sort: Why the Clustering of Like-Minded America Is Tearing Us Apart.” Instead, Schlesinger’s polemic is an intervention in the “canon wars” of the 1980s and 1990s, when curriculums in history and literature courses became the source of passionate national debate. One defining event in that discussion was the publication in 1987 of “The Closing of the American Mind” by the philosopher Allan Bloom. Another occurred with the Jan. 18, 1995, vote by the United States Senate (99 to 1) condemning proposed “national history standards” promulgated by the National Center for History in the Schools at the University of California, Los Angeles, for not showing “a decent respect for United States history’s roots in Western civilization,” in the words of the Senate resolution . Amid what was becoming a debate among left-leaning academics and populist tribunes like Rush Limbaugh and Lynne Cheney, Schlesinger sought to define a liberal alternative to what he described as militant multiculturalism on the left and bigoted monoculturalism on the right: “The monoculturalists are hyperpatriots, fundamentalists, evangelicals, laissez-faire doctrinaires, homophobes, anti-abortionists, pro-assault-gun people.” Of the two groups, Schlesinger considered the monoculturalists a greater threat: “Left-wing political correctness is an irritation and a nuisance. It becomes a threat to the young only when it invades the public schools.” In contrast: “Right-wing political correctness catches kids before they are old enough to take care of themselves and in environments where they are rarely exposed to clashes of opinion. It is a weapon with which small-town bigots, conducting pogroms against Darwin, Marx, J.D. Salinger, Judy Blume and other villains, seize control of school committees and library boards.” According to Schlesinger, “Monoculturalists abuse history as flagrantly as multiculturalists. They sanitize the past and install their own set of patriotic heroes and myths.” In a chapter titled “History the Weapon,” Schlesinger acknowledges what he sees as the valid complaints of multiculturalists: “American history was long written in the interests of white Anglo-Saxon Protestant males. My father, growing up in the 1890s in Xenia, a small Ohio town containing large contingents of Germans, Irish and blacks, one day asked his father, who had come from Germany as a child and whose hero was Carl Schurz, the American general, politician and reformer, why the schoolbooks portrayed England as the one and only mother country. My grandfather’s wry comment was that apparently the only Germans worth mentioning were ‘the Hessians who had fought on the wrong side in the War for Independence.’ Irish and blacks fared even less well in schoolbooks, and the only good Indians were dead Indians. Non-WASPs were the invisible men (and women) in the American past.” Schlesinger notes one predictable response by minorities to their exclusion from mainstream historical texts and commemorations: “The ethnic enclaves thus developed a compensatory literature.” To illustrate this, he quotes from the Irish-American scholar John V. Kelleher about articles claiming “that the Continental Army was 76 percent Irish, or that many of George Washington’s closest friends were nuns or priests.” However badly the “white ethnics” suffered from Anglo-Saxon Protestant condescension, Schlesinger notes, blacks, Latinos and Native Americans suffered far worse: “The situation is radically different for nonwhite minorities facing not snobbism but racism.” But Schlesinger maintains that what he calls “compensatory history” is bad history, whether it takes the form of Afrocentrism, or the claim that other regions have falsely taken credit for inventions that originated in Africa, or what he, following Kelleher, calls “the there’s-always-an-Irishman-at-the-bottom-of-it-doing-the-real-work approach to American history.” These views ceased to be harmless folly when their holders enlisted the support of federal, state or local governments to impose them as official versions of history, Schlesinger argues: “ ‘Who controls the past controls the future,’ runs the Party slogan in George Orwell’s ‘1984’; ‘who controls the present controls the past.’ ” At worst, Schlesinger writes, the sanctioning of state ethnonational ideologues could Balkanize American society further. He denounces the federal 1974 Ethnic Heritage Studies Program Act because it “ignored those millions of Americans — surely a majority — who refused identification with any particular ethnic group.” Schlesinger may have seen himself in the latter group. His paternal ancestors included Prussian Jews and Austrian Catholics, while his mother was a descendant of the Mayflower colonists and supposedly related to the 19th-century American historian George Bancroft. “I don’t want to sound too apocalyptic about these developments,” Schlesinger writes. Indeed, unlike many of his contemporaries who criticized multiculturalism, he did not see Latino immigration as either a linguistic or a social challenge to American national unity. Schlesinger noted: “As for Hispanic-Americans, first-generation Hispanics born in the United States speak English fluently, according to a Rand Corporation study; more than half of second-generation Hispanics give up Spanish altogether.” Subsequent social science studies by Stephen Trejo, Richard Alba and others have confirmed that marriage outside of the group and erosion of ethnic identity tends to increase with each generation of Latinos, as it did in the case of European immigrant diasporas in the United States in the past. Like other memorable tracts for the times, “The Disuniting of America” blends passages of enduring relevance with much that has become obsolete. Today, what is most striking about this book and other entries in the late-20th-century battle of the books is the assumption shared by all sides in the canon wars that the fate of the nation might depend on the content of the curriculum, as determined by academic experts. Since Schlesinger wrote, there has been a collapse in the authority of establishments of all kinds, not just academics. In the age of Twitter and Facebook and 24-hour cable news, public intellectuals like Schlesinger, based in the academy or in journalism, have lost influence over public opinion to movie stars, cable commentators, pop musicians and late-night comedians. Perhaps the greatest change has involved the declining status of liberal arts education and the historical studies at its core. In response to decades of slower-than-expected growth and heightened foreign competition, students deserted the humanities for more practical degrees like business. Meanwhile, in the 2000s and 2010s the bipartisan elite shared a new consensus that national success depended not on widespread liberal arts education but on student proficiency in science, technology, engineering and math. The debate over federal “no child left behind” standards that aimed to increase the number of Americans who go into engineering or science eclipsed the debates over the content of the American historical pantheon. The only academics who seem to find audiences among today’s elite are economists and social scientists who claim to know how to boost gross domestic product or manipulate human behavior. Today the canon wars have given way to the icon wars. Although the focus of controversy has shifted from the contents of undergraduate education to the historical figures commemorated by statues and currency, debates over America’s past continue to mirror debates over America’s present and future. To the challenges of teaching history in a way that is at once accurate and inclusive, Schlesinger remains an insightful guide. Michael Lind, a professor at the Lyndon B. Johnson School of Public Affairs at the University of Texas, is the author of “Land of Promise: An Economic History of the United States.”  Follow New York Times Books on Facebook and Twitter (@nytimesbooks) , and sign up for our newsletter . A version of this article appears in print on , on Page 17 of the Sunday Book Review with the headline: Return to the Disunited States of America . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Related Coverage Arthur Schlesinger, Historian of Power, Dies at 89 March 1, 2007 Image Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              