   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index U.S. Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by October Surprises Don’t Necessarily Sway Elections, or Occur in October Image Henry Kissinger said peace was “at hand” in Vietnam in October 1972. Credit Associated Press By  Richard Pérez-Peña Oct. 31, 2016 In a breathless month with a decade’s worth of political bombshells, the phrase “October surprise” has become a regular part of the news lexicon. By the strictest definition, an October surprise is news specifically (and cynically) timed by one side or another to sway an election, with evidence that it changed voters’ minds and moved the polls. More loosely, the term is applied to any big, late development, deliberate or not, perhaps even ones that show no sign of altering the outcome. Some reference sources say the phrase was first used in the 1972 presidential election, while others trace it to the 1980 campaign (the first time it was used by The New York Times). The concept, of course, predates the wording. Here are some examples of what could be considered October surprises. OCT. 31, 1968 President Lyndon Baines Johnson announced a halt to bombing of North Vietnam, based on his claim that peace talks had “entered a new and a very much more hopeful phase,” and he invited the government of South Vietnam and the Viet Cong to take part in negotiations. Raising hopes that the war might end soon, the announcement appeared to bolster the standing in the polls of Vice President Hubert H. Humphrey, the Democratic presidential nominee, but Humphrey still fell short in the election against former Vice President Richard M. Nixon, the Republican. OCT. 26, 1972 Declaring that “we believe that peace is at hand,” Henry Kissinger, President Nixon’s national security adviser, announced the draft of an agreement to end the Vietnam War. This is often cited as the original October surprise, though the term did not enter common usage for several years. The news had little effect on the polls because Nixon was already cruising to a crushing defeat of Senator George McGovern. Mr. Kissinger’s announcement was a bit premature — the South Vietnamese government had not been consulted, treaty talks broke down in December, and the United States resumed bombing North Vietnam — but a peace accord was signed in January 1973. OCTOBER 1980 The Republican nominee, Ronald Reagan, and his aides repeatedly warned that President Jimmy Carter, a Democrat, would try an October surprise, probably in the form of winning the release of American hostages held for more than a year in Iran. The Reagan campaign’s frequent use of the term helped popularize it. Some people have since charged that Reagan aides actually tried to prevent a hostage release before the election, through back-channel communications with Iran, a claim that has been widely refuted. The hostages were freed in January 1981 — on the day Reagan was inaugurated. OCT. 1, 1992 Eleven weeks after dropping out of the presidential contest, the independent Ross Perot dropped back in. Over the summer, Bill Clinton, the Democratic governor of Arkansas, had built a big lead in the polls over President George Bush, a Republican. Mr. Perot’s support swelled after his re-entry — he would eventually get 19 percent of the popular vote — while Mr. Clinton’s shrank steadily. But the change was not enough to keep Mr. Clinton from winning. Image Bill Clinton and George Bush at a debate with Ross Perot, center, in Michigan in 1992. Credit J. David Ake/Agence France-Presse OCTOBER 1996 In the last weeks of the race, the news was filled with revelations about Democratic fund-raisers, some with close ties to the Clinton White House, who illegally raised money from Asian donors. Some fund-raisers were later convicted of campaign finance violations. President Clinton’s wide lead in the polls over Bob Dole, the Republican nominee, shrank markedly, but he still won re-election by a comfortable margin. NOV. 2, 2000 News broke that George W. Bush, the Texas governor running for president, had been arrested in 1976 and charged with driving while drunk, which Mr. Bush, a Republican, acknowledged the next day . (O.K., it was November, but it still counts as an October surprise.) By then, it was common knowledge that Mr. Bush had been a heavy drinker but had quit in the 1980s. The news did not appear to affect the state of play. His race with Vice President Al Gore, a Democrat, remained where it had been: too close to call. OCT. 1, 2016 The Times published pages from Donald J. Trump’s 1995 tax returns showing that Mr. Trump, the Republican nominee, had claimed a loss of more than $900 million and might have avoided paying income taxes for 18 years. OCT. 7, 2016 WikiLeaks released excerpts from private, paid speeches that Hillary Clinton, the Democratic nominee, had given to financial firms. It was one in a series of disclosures the group would make over the next few weeks from hacked emails, intended to damage Mrs. Clinton’s campaign. OCT. 8, 2016 The Washington Post revealed a 2005 recording of Mr. Trump bragging about groping and kissing women. OCT. 28, 2016 James B. Comey, the F.B.I. director, revealed that the bureau was resuming its inquiry into Clinton-related emails. But he said nothing about what was in the emails, or whether Mrs. Clinton had sent or received any of them.  For breaking news and in-depth reporting, follow @NYTNational on Twitter. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page A 17 of the New York edition with the headline: The October Surprise: It Can Be Early or Late, and Consequential or Not . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Related Coverage F.B.I. Begins Review of Clinton Aide’s Emails Oct. 31, 2016 Image Emails in Anthony Weiner Inquiry Jolt Hillary Clinton’s Campaign Oct. 28, 2016 Image What Else Is on the Ballot? Minimum Wage, Death Penalty and Guns Oct. 26, 2016 Image Two Candidates Vie for One House Seat (for the Fourth Time) Oct. 29, 2016 Image Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              