   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Media Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Daily News Said to Get Bids From Cablevision and Billionaire Grocer By  Ravi Somaiya March 31, 2015 The billionaire owner of the Gristedes grocery chain and the owner of Newsday and the Madison Square Garden Company have both submitted bids for The Daily News in New York, according to news reports and two people familiar with the negotiations. The reports on Tuesday, in Reuters and The New York Post , said that Cablevision , led by James L. Dolan , who also runs Madison Square Garden, had bid a single dollar for the newspaper. John A. Catsimatidis, the Gristedes owner, submitted a larger bid last week, according to one of the people familiar with the negotiations. The precise details of the bids, which would presumably take into account the fact that the tabloid loses millions each year, were not disclosed. Representatives for Cablevision, Mr. Catsimatidis and The News all declined to comment. Cablevision and Mr. Catsimatidis have been widely considered the front-runners in buying The News from its current owner, Mortimer B. Zuckerman , who said last month that he was considering selling the newspaper after more than 20 years of stewardship. In a memo to staff members last month, Mr. Zuckerman, 77, said that he had been approached about selling the newspaper and “thought it would be prudent to explore the possibility.” He had not come to the decision easily, he said, and believed that “the immense hard work in turning the business around in an extremely challenging period for the industry” had put the newspaper in a strong position, particularly online. In 2010, the Washington Post company sold Newsweek magazine, which had lost $30 million the previous year, to the audio entrepreneur Sidney Harman, at a price of $1. The company also agreed to cover up to $10 million of the magazine’s bills along with some pension liabilities. The News, like many papers, has struggled with a decline in advertising and slumping newsstand sales. Its circulation, once in the millions, fell to 427,452 on weekdays and 558,057 on Sundays for the six months ending last September, the most recent figures available, according to the Alliance for Audited Media. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page A 20 of the New York edition with the headline: Daily News Said to Draw Pair of Offers to Purchase It . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Related Coverage Owner of New York’s Daily News, Mortimer Zuckerman, Weighs Selling It Feb. 26, 2015 Image Billionaire Grocer Is Said to Be a Suitor for The Daily News March 2, 2015 Image Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              