   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by By Design The Designer Who Doesn’t Want You to Sit Down Image The Spanish designer Patricia Urquiola in a rare moment of repose at her family home on Ibiza. Credit Ricardo Labougle By  Nikil Saval Nov. 10, 2015 The Spanish industrial designer Patricia Urquiola tackles the ultimate frontier of bad design: the American office. When Patricia Urquiola likes a place, she calls it ‘‘easy.’’ Comfort, unpretentiousness, an intuitive eclecticism in the furnishings: These seem to be her cynosures. There’s not much left of any of these things in Ibiza, where the Spanish designer has vacationed with her family since the 1970s and where she maintains a home in the hills: Come August, the shores are pasty with English tourists, the druggy clubs crammed till dawn. But what Urquiola — possibly the most lauded and in-demand industrial designer in Europe, on par with Philippe Starck and Hella Jongerius (who is, along with Urquiola, one of the few women in the highest ranks of the field) — seems to mean by ease is in fact something closer to ceaseless flux. She likes places (and designs) that force your mind to make unexpected and endless leaps. To be at ease, on Planet Urquiola, is to be constantly in motion. Her own manner — passionate, intense, her speech a glorious slurry of English, Spanish, French and Italian — is far from straightforward or simple to decipher, and she is rarely happy sitting in place. The two days I spent with her were a high-velocity whirl across the island: immediately from her house to lunch at La Paloma, a Mediterranean restaurant favored by Jade Jagger, to the frenetic beach at Cala Nova for coffee, to a late dinner at Macao Cafe, a favorite of Italian tourists, where Urquiola circulated among the tables, to another day of conversation in many locations throughout her house, to a spin through Sluiz, a Dutch-owned design warehouse filled with every manner of multicolored kitsch, to Heart, a club and two restaurants she designed for elBulli maven Ferran Adrià and Cirque du Soleil co-founder Guy Laliberté, to dinner at Experimental Beach, a playa-side restaurant where you can intersperse courses of patatas bravas and prawns with spells of water-wading and, finally, to the hotel for drinks and dancing, where she offered a reprieve at 2 a.m., even though I am fairly certain that she herself was ready to keep going. (It is no wonder that the Spanish and Italian press have taken to calling her ‘‘Hurricane Urquiola.’’) Image From left: Urquiola’s iridescent Shimmer table from 2014; her cosseting 2004 Bloomy chairs for Moroso. Credit From left: Courtesy of Glas Italia; Alessandro Paderni/Courtesy of Moroso The visit began and culminated with Can Tomas, her family house, which crests one of the hills on the island, providing unobstructed views of San Antonio Bay’s sunsets and the seething palette of verdure and ocher soil that composes the island’s countryside. The house, which was built nearly 400 years ago, is a classic of Ibiza’s inimitable brand of antique modern, both blocky and airy. There is hardly a trace of her own work in sight; Urquiola claims to be unwilling to impose her own aesthetic on a house that she associates deeply with her childhood. And yet the house also provides a series of clues that help unlock the secret of Urquiola’s style. One doesn’t so much walk through it as tunnel through it — dropping down staircases to blue-tiled, skylit rooms that lead to secret porticoes of grapefruit and lemon trees. Urquiola has called Proust’s ‘‘In Search of Lost Time’’ her ‘‘favorite design book,’’ and the memoire involuntaire of the spaces in Proust seems to explain the importance Urquiola places on leaving uncompromised the ancient layout and design of the house. So, too, does it matter that Proust is about unlikely connections — the way tripping over an uneven paving stone can open the door to a flood of memories. All spaces are connected to other spaces. For Urquiola, the difference between designing a hotel or a home, a showroom or an office, is minimal. ‘‘I think more and more,’’ she said on more than one occasion, ‘‘they are going to be melted.’’ Image From left: the Klara armchair in Patrizia Moroso’s home in Italy; Urquiola's 2005 Tufty-Time modular sofa for B&B Italia. Credit From left: Jason Schmidt; Courtesy of B&B; Italia The idea that ease means you always have to be in motion, that comfort means you actually have to be put off guard, has been a constant in Urquiola’s own life, which she describes as one of relentless adaptation. This began in her youth, when regular trips to the island from her northern Spain hometown of Oviedo (Urquiola emphasizes that her personality is ‘‘Atlantic, not Mediterranean’’) put her in disorienting contact with an international mélange of hippies and fugitives from the travails of a relentlessly modernizing Europe, and continued with her decision — rare for a Spaniard at the time — to leave her country when she was 22 to study architecture at the renowned Polytechnic University of Milan. Her father, an engineer with a passion for composing jazz, and her mother, who studied philosophy and literature in Francisco Franco’s deeply conservative Spain, encouraged her going away. In Milan, she became a favorite student of Achille Castiglioni , the enormously influential Italian industrial designer, and after graduating joined the studio of De Padova , where she was put in charge of new product design. It was Maddalena De Padova who taught Urquiola the value of the odd juxtaposition, the odiousness of matching colors. Urquiola remembered how De Padova liked to quote her friend Charles Eames when wandering around the studio: ‘‘The connections, the connections, the connections!’’ What Eames meant was, in a sense, the importance of disconnection in design — the ability of the designer to provoke by joining together the seemingly disjunctive, providing a new understanding in the viewer or user of the interconnection of all things. From there she went on to run product design at Piero Lissoni ’s studio for five years until 2001, when, in the aftermath of a divorce at age 39, Urquiola opened her own Milan-based studio, one that — drawing on her training as both an architect and designer, and her guilelessness when it came to trying something new — would produce buildings as well as products in every possible medium. Italian companies, already familiar with her from her years at other firms, rushed to Urquiola with commissions, and she responded with a flurry of products. The endless list of companies that have commissioned work from her — Alessi, B&B Italia, Kartell, Molteni & C, Moroso and San Lorenzo, to name only a few — reads like an exhaustive A-Z of contemporary design. Impossibly varied and promiscuous in their aims — Urquiola has produced ceramic tiles, fabrics and glassware, in addition to chairs, tables, sofas and desks, and in her capacity as architect has designed several hotels — her products collectively speak of her congenital unwillingness to repeat herself and her drive to push ever more ‘‘connections.’’ Image Urquiola’s Openest office collection for Haworth includes a chair whose back folds down to create a stool (shown in sketch). Credit Haworth Analogues for Urquiola’s aesthetic might be found less among other designers than among painters — the dripping, whimsical shapes of Joan Miró or Yves Tanguy. What typifies all her designs is not only the unusual forms and materials but the unembarrassed use of color, starkly distinguishing her woozy, sinuous shapes from the familiar, monotonous palette of slate grays. That, and her indefatigable, and inimitable, productivity. As Paola Antonelli, the senior curator of architecture and design at the Museum of Modern Art, says, ‘‘Patricia doesn’t even have a style, but rather a way of making every chair, every lighting fixture, every table unique and innovative — even when it is made of the most traditional materials.’’ Something of her soft, melting, churning aesthetic is present in the work she is currently doing for Haworth which, along with Herman Miller, Steelcase and HNI, is one of the four big American office-furniture companies, but which until now was one of the least committed to ‘‘good design.’’ Two years ago, Urquiola was hired to be, in her words, ‘‘a visionaire,’’ someone to drive the company beyond its habitual prejudices and limits. (She has since been named art director of Cassina , also owned by Haworth.) The world of the office is one that could use some vision. From cavernous co-working spaces with their stalagmites of dark, disposable Ikea desks and dorm-roof sofas to the airless open-plan warrens and color-sapping fluorescence of the corporate world, today’s office is a wasteland. Despite the fabled disruptiveness of technology, little has actually changed in the essential look of the office. But combining the mobility offered by new technology and comfort has hitherto been out of reach for most designers. Image From left: the Crinoline chair for B&B Italia Outdoor from 2008, which interprets a traditional Philippine chair in abaca and polyurethane; the webbed Tropicalia chair made for Moroso, also from 2008; the Fjord swivel armchair and stool from 2002, selected for the design collection at MoMA. Credit From left: Courtesy of B&B; Italia; Alessandro Paderni/Couretsy of Moroso; The Museum of Modern Art/Licensed by Scala/Art Resource, NY It’s not surprising that Urquiola’s initial frustrations with the office came out of its settledness. She described her impatience with the conference-room-bound world of work, and how she insists on moving from space to space. At one point, she expressed a desire to have a ‘‘corridor meeting’’ — the sort of informal, standing meeting that takes place when people run into each other in a hallway. Ultimately, though, her contribution lies in the return of an imaginativeness that has long been exorcised from the office world. She speaks, somewhat vaguely, of a world of ‘‘postcapitalism,’’ in which work and home blend ever more seamlessly. But her most obvious source of inspiration is her previous work in unearthing the psychic structures of the home, and the restlessness of her own comportment. Her office work for Haworth, called Openest (as in ‘‘open’’ plus ‘‘nest’’), which launched in 2014, stands out from the pack of reiterative chairs and conference tables. Openest is defined by its thick, floppy partitions: Made of sandwiched polyester foam and fabric (rather than wrapped particleboard), they seem to canopy the spaces they shield and exude a surreal pliability. She has since brightened the colors and added glass partitions slicked over with a psychedelic dichroic film. Harking back to the flowing, open designs that briefly flourished in the 1960s — such as the Action Office George Nelson helped create for Herman Miller — it also draws heavily on Urquiola’s long-developed habits of irony. To call it an office that looks like a home would be a banality. The idea of home, too, is reconfigured in her work — calling up associations of our deepest, most surreal ideas of what comfort could mean, tapping into a human inclination never to stay in place but to be always wildly at ease. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page 108 of T Magazine with the headline: Woman on Top . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              