   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Briefing Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Europe Edition John Bercow, Angela Merkel, Israel: Your Tuesday Briefing By  Patrick Boehler Feb. 7, 2017 Good morning. Here’s what you need to know to start your day: Image Credit Jason Henry for The New York Times • “All over Europe it’s happening.” In a speech to American military personnel, President Trump accused the news media of downplaying attacks by Islamist militants in Europe. The White House later released a list of what it said were 78 attacks that were carried out or inspired by the Islamic State. It claimed that “most have not received the media attention they deserved,” but the list included well-reported attacks in Paris, Brussels and Orlando, among others. The Justice Department urged a federal appeals court to reinstate Mr. Trump’s targeted travel ban, saying immediate action was needed to ensure the nation’s safety. Almost 100 U.S. companies — including Apple, Facebook, Google and Microsoft — filed a legal brief arguing that the order was unconstitutional. _____ Video John Bercow, the speaker of the House of Commons, said Monday that he would oppose having President Trump address Parliament. Published On Feb. 6, 2017 • Mr. Trump has rejected criticism in Twitter posts, saying in one that polls showing that a majority of Americans oppose his travel order were “fake.” In another , he bristled at suggestions that Stephen K. Bannon, his chief strategist, holds the real power in the West Wing. Mr. Trump was angered that he had not been fully briefed on details of the executive order he signed giving Mr. Bannon a seat on the National Security Council. Meanwhile, John Bercow, above, the speaker of Britain’s House of Commons, cited his “opposition to racism and sexism” among the reasons he opposed letting Mr. Trump address lawmakers on his state visit, expected later this year. _____ Image Credit Andreas Solaro/Agence France-Presse — Getty Images • In Germany , a growing number of officials are asking whether they need a Plan B for a Europe that doesn’t look to the U.S. for leadership. Chancellor Angela Merkel will be in Poland today in an effort to mend ties with Warsaw’s euroskeptic leaders. Ms. Merkel needs to shore up support for European institutions as the bloc prepares to begin negotiations with Britain next month over the country’s exit. Britain’s resolve on “Brexit” has hardened, depriving Ms. Merkel of a crucial ally on many fronts. _____ Image Credit Ahmad Gharabli/Agence France-Presse — Getty Images • Israel’s Parliament  passed a law that would retroactively legalize Jewish settlements on privately owned Palestinian land. Though it was likely to be overturned by the Supreme Court, the law was a stark example of right-wing assertiveness. _____ Image Credit Ismail Ferdous for The New York Times • Remarkably good public health news: Researchers may have found the tools to stop cholera , the global pandemic that has killed tens of millions since it rose from the swamps of Bangladesh two centuries ago. A vaccine accepted by the W.H.O. is being stockpiled for epidemics. _____ Image Credit Doug Mills/The New York Times • And this is another busy week at the U.S. Capitol: Vice President Mike Pence could be called upon to break a potential 50-50 tie in the Senate over the nomination of Betsy DeVos as education secretary . Mr. Trump’s nominees for attorney general and director of the Environmental Protection Agency could be confirmed this week. Today’s episode of our new podcast, The Daily, focuses on Mr. Trump’s changes to Obama-era restraints on the financial industry. Listen here if you have an iOS device or here for an Android device. _____ Business Image Credit Caleb Kenna for The New York Times • American cheese makers are turning to microbiology to catch up with European competitors. • Standard measures of economic growth  may obscure more profound advances in innovation and well-being. • President Trump ’s travel ban has disrupted the business of corporate travel to the U.S. “Many groups will just look to move the meeting elsewhere,” one industry leader said. • Here’s a snapshot of global markets . In the News Image Credit Syrian Arab News Agency, via Agence France-Presse — Getty Images • Syria has executed up to 13,000 people in mass hangings in just one of its many prisons since the start of the six-year uprising against President Bashar al-Assad, Amnesty International contends. [ The New York Times ] • Eight former Bosnian Serb police officers are the first to stand trial in Serbia over their roles in the killing of more than 1,300 civilians in Srebrenica in 1995. [ Balkan Insight ] • Vladimir Kara-Murza , a leader of the Russian opposition, has fallen into a life-threatening coma caused by an unknown poison, his wife said. [ The New York Times ] • François Fillon , the conservative candidate in France’s presidential race, sought to salvage his campaign with a pugnacious news conference, which included an apology for employing his wife. [ The New York Times ] • A court in Würzburg , Germany, is considering a Syrian refugee’s petition to force Facebook to find and delete posts that falsely link him to terrorism. [ The New York Times ] • Lawmakers in Scotland’s regional Parliament are likely to reject “Brexit” in a symbolic vote today. [ The Scotsman ] Smarter Living Image Credit Chi Birmingham • We’re all busy in the morning, so don’t waste time: Here’s how to do the shortest workout possible . • Two brothers and a sister credit a surprising source for their lifelong closeness: their parents’ ugly divorce . •  Recipe of the day: Everyone needs a spicy noodle dish that comes together in less than half an hour. Here’s a great one . Noteworthy Image Credit Tara Todras-Whitehill for The New York Times • Tunisians are glimpsing parts of their past that have long been suppressed: “Our goal was to show that Tunisian modernity did not start with independence or colonization,” one exhibition curator said. • Italy eliminated Argentina, the defending champion, from the Davis Cup . • The cuisine at Giacomo Bulleri’s restaurants in Milan invokes a beloved rural way of life that no longer exists. “Innovative restaurants, people go there to try,” a designer said . “Here, they come to eat.” • Recordings of 1970s Bob Marley concerts have been painstakingly restored after their discovery in the basement of a London hotel. • And here are some of our favorite looks from the last leg of the men’s fashion season in New York City. Back Story Image Credit William P. Gottleib The Berlin International Film Festival opens this week with a tale of survival , that of one of the 20th century’s greatest jazz guitarists: Django Reinhardt . He was born in Belgium in 1910 to a Roma family that earned a living playing music from town to town. Reinhardt started off playing the banjo in Paris dance halls. At 18, he lost the use of two fingers on his left hand in a fire, and adapted with a new technique. He rose to fame in the ’30s. But with World War II and the Nazi occupation of France, Reinhardt tried to flee, fearing that, as a Roma and a jazz musician, he would be detained and killed. Instead, his fame — and the popularity of an officially discredited art form — may have saved him. “The Germans used Paris as the base for soldiers to rest and relax,” said Michael Dregni, a Reinhardt biographer . “Jazz was the hot music of the time, so they all want to go out and see jazz, and Django was the biggest star in Europe.” Reinhardt lived through the war, dying of a sudden stroke in 1953. His legacy lives on in the genre he helped create: Gypsy jazz. _____ Your Morning Briefing is published weekday mornings. Read the latest edition of the U.S. briefing here and the latest for Asia and Australia here . What would you like to see here? Contact us at europebriefing@nytimes.com . Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              