   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Morning Agenda: What’s Next as U.S. Exits Paris Accord Image President Trump at the White House on Thursday. Announcing a withdrawal from the Paris accord, he said that pact imposed wildly unfair environmental standards on American businesses and workers. Credit Doug Mills/The New York Times By  Sei Chong June 2, 2017 Now we know: President Trump has said he will pull the United States out of the Paris climate accord. So what’s next ? In the absence of American leadership, China may move to fill the void . The leaders of other nations united to criticize Mr. Trump’s decision. And President Emmanuel Macron of France extended an offer to Americans: “To all scientists, engineers, entrepreneurs, responsible citizens who were disappointed by the decision of the president of the United States, I want to say that they will find in France a second home.” Back in the United States, cities, states and companies pledged to meet the United States’ greenhouse gas emissions targets under the Paris accord. The unnamed group so far includes three governors, 30 mayors, more than 80 university presidents and more than 100 businesses. Corporate leaders in the United States expressed their disappointment : • Lloyd C. Blankfein, the chief executive of Goldman Sachs, who had never used Twitter before, used his first tweet to say that Mr. Trump’s decision was a “setback for the environment and for the U.S.’s leadership position in the world.” • Two chief executives who sat on Mr. Trump’s economic advisory council — Elon Musk of Tesla and Robert A. Iger of Disney — said they would leave the group. But many executives don’t expect there to be an immediate impact on their company’s investments and strategies, The Wall Street Journal reports. And Wall Street itself didn’t seem too worried, with stock markets extending gains after the announcement, The Financial Times reports. Blue Apron Files for I.P.O. Blue Apron, the food-kit delivery start-up, has made the move to go public . The size of the initial public offering has yet to be determined, but the prospectus listed a fund-raising target of $100 million, a preliminary number used to determine filing fees. The key figures in the filing show that sales at the five-year-old company rose tenfold from 2014 to 2016, while losses and marketing costs rose. Blue Apron also said that it would have three classes of shares, allowing management to maintain control more easily: • Class A: These will be sold to the public and will carry one vote per share. • Class B: The founders and early investors own these shares, which carry 10 votes per share. • Class C: These have no voting rights and will be used for purposes like acquisitions. Texas Grants Relief to Cities With Pension Woes Dallas and Houston were on the verge of joining Detroit and Puerto Rico among the growing number of places bankrupted by huge pension obligations. Instead, Texas legislation, which was signed into law this week, will allow the two cities to meet their pension obligations by using measured reductions in pension accruals for workers and retirees, mainly in secondary benefit categories like inflation adjustments and lump-sum payouts. In exchange, the pension funds will receive more money from the cities to protect core benefits. The new laws would also establish financial benchmarks that pension funds must meet or face more benefit cuts. The model may not be perfectly replicated, however. The relief granted to Dallas and Houston is illegal in many cities and states with similar burdens. California, Illinois, Kansas, Oregon and Pennsylvania are among the states where public pensions cannot be reduced. Coming Up • At 8:30 a.m., the Labor Department will release data on hiring and unemployment for May . Analysts expect that payrolls will have added 176,000 workers and that the jobless rate will stay at 4.4 percent. Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              