   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Weddings Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Orly Friedman, Matthew Miller Image Sept. 10, 2017 Orly Diane Friedman and Matthew Williamson Miller are to be married Sept. 10 at Star Peak Meadow in Aspen, Colo. Rabbi Noa Kushner is to officiate. Ms. Friedman, 32, is the head of lower school and assistant head of school at the Khan Lab School in Mountain View, Calif. She graduated from Yale, and received a master's degree in early childhood education from George Mason University. She also received an M.B.A. from Stanford. She is a daughter of Ann B. Friedman and Thomas L. Friedman of Bethesda, Md. The bride’s father, a three-time Pulitzer Prize winner, is a columnist for The New York Times, and an author of six books, including “Thank You for Being Late.” Her mother founded Planet Word, a museum of words and language being planned in Washington. Mr. Miller, 35, is the director and co-head of project finance for Recurrent Energy, an electric utility company in San Francisco. He graduated cum laude from Dartmouth. He is a son of Patricia Miller and Dr. Bruce Miller of Gastonia, N.C. The groom’s father is a dentist in Gastonia. The couple met through the dating app Hinge in 2014. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page ST 25 of the New York edition with the headline: Orly Friedman,  Matthew Miller . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              