   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Weddings Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Marcy McCullaugh and Joel Mendel: From 0 to 100 in No Time Image By  Jaclyn Peiser Aug. 6, 2016 Marcy Elisabeth McCullaugh and Joel Peter Mendel were married Aug. 6 in Yosemite National Park in California. Matthew Weiner, a friend of the groom who became a Universal Life minister for the occasion, officiated at the Majestic Yosemite Hotel. The bride, 36, is a global issues and policy adviser in San Ramon, Calif., where she writes corporate responsibility and sustainability reports for Chevron. She graduated with honors from Swarthmore College and received a master’s in Russian and Eurasian studies from Harvard and a Ph.D. in political science from the University of California, Berkeley. Her previous marriage ended in divorce. She is a daughter of Nina Stern McCullaugh and James L. McCullaugh of Sherman Oaks, Calif. The groom, 37, is the director of asset deployment at SolarCity, a solar power provider in San Mateo, Calif., where he matches solar projects with investors. He graduated from the University of Michigan and received an M.B.A. and a master’s degree in engineering management from Northwestern University. He is a son of Maureen B. Mendel and Eric R. Mendel of Bloomfield Hills, Mich. When Mr. Mendel sent Ms. McCullaugh a message through OkCupid in August 2012, she was skeptical about online dating. She had recently ended a marriage and hadn’t been single for eight years. “I wasn’t searching for a serious partner,” she said. “It was more that I needed practice-dating again.” But Mr. Mendel’s message stood out. “He looked cute,” she said. “And everything was grammatically correct,” a rarity when it came to messages in her OkCupid inbox. They agreed to meet for drinks for, as Ms. McCullaugh calls it, a “Date Zero” — a date with low pressure. “You never go out to dinner on Date Zero,” she said. Instead, she said her strategy was to meet for coffee or drinks to decide if the online chemistry translates into real-life chemistry. Mr. Mendel was familiar with the concept, having been on several Date Zeros. “My experience has been that you have to roll the dice,” he said. “Your best bet is to go on a bunch of these fast dates, and you find out whether you click or not. And if you don’t, you haven’t wasted anyone’s time trying to figure it out.” The couple met at a beer hall in San Francisco. “Within five or 10 minutes, there was definitely physical attraction and chemistry,” she said. They ended up talking for several hours, long past the normal Date Zero maximum. They found that they had a lot in common, including their love for travel, and they exchanged horror stories, trying to one-up each other with disastrous experiences abroad. “I thought, ‘Wow, this girl is really amazing, really fun and adventurous, and she’s pretty and seems to like me’ ” he said. “Those are things I look for.” A version of this article appears in print on , on Page ST 15 of the New York edition with the headline: From Zero to 100 in No Time at All . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              