   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Capital Field Notes Soft Money’s Squishy Political Influence By  Derek Willis June 18, 2014 To congressional campaign workers, the groups that can raise and spend unlimited donations can seem like unpredictable wedding guests: You don’t know when they’ll show up, what they’ll bring or whether their presence will prove a welcome distraction or a disaster. That uneasiness permeates a report by Daniel P. Tokaji and Renata E. B. Strause of the Moritz College of Law at Ohio State University released this morning. It surveys the state of campaign finance and finds that the relationship between candidates and like-minded independent groups is characterized by subtle cooperation, not outright coordination. For campaigns targeted by super PACs and other outside groups — those outside spending groups that have reshaped the past two elections — the feeling is often one of helplessness. “It was like a giant poker game and I wasn’t even sitting at the table,” said a Senate campaign manager quoted in the report. The report, “The New Soft Money,” is based on interviews with former lawmakers, campaign staff and operatives who have worked on independent spending efforts. It was funded by the Open Society Foundations , founded by the financier George Soros, a major supporter of liberal causes, super PACs and candidates. Image A foundation started by George Soros, a supporter of liberal super PACS, provided financial support for a study of the effects of outside funding on candidates. Credit Michel Euler/Associated Press Some of the report’s main points will be familiar to people who have followed the federal campaign finance system in the past decade: the rise of outside spending in the wake of the Citizens United case and others that have followed; the tendency of outside groups to do the “dirty work” of negative campaigning; and the ease with which campaigns and independent groups can send signals to each other without crossing the legal ban against coordination. There is evidence, too, for the common perception that political parties — especially state and local ones — have become marginal players in federal elections. “Republicans and Democrats from different parts of the country uniformly told us that the state and local parties play little role in the federal campaigns they run today,” the authors write. But the report’s main conclusion, reinforced in multiple anecdotes, is that power has been shared with — or taken by — outside groups at the expense of candidates and parties, who are left on the defensive and forced to account for the presence of high-spending outfits. Image Credit Alex Robbins “You factor that into how you’re going to run your campaign,” Joe Walsh, an Illinois Republican who won a House seat in 2010 and lost it in 2012, told the authors. “You don’t know for sure that this big wealthy guy’s coming in, but you’ve heard he is.” That influence extends beyond the campaign to the legislative process, some former lawmakers said. “Even if it’s in the back of their mind, you can’t tell me that if somebody spends a couple of million dollars in your race that you’re not going to ... that’s not going to affect the decision-making process,” said Dan Boren, an Oklahoma Democrat who retired from the House in 2012. “It never did with me, but I can tell you, I’m sure it has an influence.” The report divides outside groups into four categories: “shadow parties” that seek to win races for a preferred party (such as American Crossroads); “old hands” that consist of established groups like the Chamber of Commerce, the A.F.L.-C.I.O. and the League of Conservation Voters, which have employed new vehicles; “new kids on the block” that focus on specific issues, such as the NextGen Climate Action Committee; and “buddy PACs,” formed to elect or defeat a single candidate. Of these, political operatives interviewed for the report expressed the most concern about the last two, which are furthest from the political system they know in terms of personnel and tactics. Some of this criticism is self-serving; one reason that the report has on-the-record quotations from several former lawmakers but no current ones is that some of those who are out of office can place some blame for their defeat at the feet of super PACs or nonprofit groups. But the absence of comments by current members of Congress is also an indicator of the nervousness many have about the impact of outside spending. Any member of Congress “is scared to death that they might get hit from the outside,” said Tim Holden, a Pennsylvania Democrat who was defeated in a primary election in 2012 . While yearning for greater candidate and party control over campaign spending, candidates and their staffs also appear to have resigned themselves to the current system. They offer various ideas for increasing the pace of disclosure or permitting unlimited donations directly to candidates, but there is little appetite in Congress for legislative action on campaign finance. Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              