   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Business Day Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Common Sense Following the (Bike) Trail to Amazon’s Second Headquarters Image A dog park provided by Amazon and adjacent to one of its buildings in Seattle. The company is considering various factors as it decides where to put a second headquarters. Credit Elaine Thompson/Associated Press By  James B. Stewart Oct. 26, 2017 Amazon said this week it had received proposals from 238 cities and regions across North America that are vying for its new, second headquarters, called HQ2. No wonder: With a prize of 50,000 high-paying jobs, a promised $5 billion in construction spending and the prestige of having a headquarters for one of the world’s fastest-growing, best-known tech companies, the contest is vastly more important than a World Series or Super Bowl. Although Amazon has stressed that it is approaching the process with no preconceived ideas and has just begun reviewing the applications, that hasn’t stopped a nationwide parlor game of picking a winner. Moody’s Analytics has already crowned Austin, Tex . The New York Times Upshot chose Denver. Amazon will probably narrow the list to a group of finalists before conducting site visits and meeting with elected officials and community leaders. It has said it expects to reach a decision next year. Still, Amazon’s stated objectives and past behavior — along with interviews with people working with the company on the selection process (none of whom were willing to be named because of their Amazon ties) and corporate governance and location experts — yield some insights into what factors the retailer values most highly and where the new headquarters may end up. (An Amazon spokesman declined to comment.) First on Amazon’s list of “key preferences and decision drivers” is “site/building,” which the company describes as being of “paramount importance.” This means far more than an attractive building or campus. Amazon prides itself on having its existing headquarters embedded in the urban fabric of Seattle. Just this month, the company said it would take over the top six floors of the Macy’s department store downtown — a move rich in irony, given how Macy’s has struggled in competing with online retailers — and it will occupy all of the office space at the Rainier Square development that is planned for the city’s downtown area. The idea of inhabiting the sort of self-contained suburban corporate parks so common in Silicon Valley seems anathema to Amazon. The company has said that 20 percent of its employees in Seattle don’t use motorized transport to get to work. Fifty-five percent walk, ride bikes or use public transportation. Fifteen percent live in the ZIP code where they work. Amazon deliberately provides cafeteria space for only a third of its employees, which encourages people to venture out of the office. The company provides retail space on the ground floor of its Seattle buildings and tries not to rent to generic national chains (its headquarters has a dozen local coffee roasters.) It has developed a sense of the kind of urban community that attracts and retains highly educated, talented and creative workers. In practical terms, this kind of dense, vibrant and architecturally distinctive urban environment exists mostly in cities that developed before the advent of the automobile, industrial cities in the Midwest and Northeast and older cities in Canada. The Alliance for Biking and Walking has ranked American cities based on the percentage of people who walk or ride bikes to work. In order, they are Boston, Washington, San Francisco, Seattle, Portland, Ore., New York, Philadelphia, Minneapolis, Chicago and Baltimore. Cities like Pittsburgh, Detroit and Baltimore are rich in underutilized historic buildings and neighborhoods that could be imaginatively repurposed, offering Amazon the opportunity to be a transformative force, something that seems to be part of the company’s DNA. New York, Chicago, Boston and Washington already have vibrant urban centers, not that they couldn’t be improved. They are also the kinds of places where local opposition to Amazon’s potential arrival would be more likely, based on factors like the impact on their already congested streets and criticism of the company’s workplace practices . Cyril Bouquet, a professor at IMD, an international business school in Lausanne, Switzerland, and an expert in companies with dual headquarters, said the choice of a second headquarters sends an important symbolic message. “Amazon has the opportunity to help build and shape a city and region,” he said. “That’s easier in a Detroit than a San Francisco. It’s much different than just tapping the talent that’s already there. Amazon will attract people and other companies that are inspired by that.” Next on Amazon’s wish list are capital and operating costs” and “incentives,” which Amazon identifies as “high priority” considerations. That is as it should be, said Charles M. Elson, a professor and director of the John L. Weinberg Center for Corporate Governance at the University of Delaware. “Amazon’s first obligation is to its investors,” Professor Elson said, which means finding “the most cost-effective city in which to locate a second headquarters,” one that “will produce the most value for the company.” Image Gov. Chris Christie of New Jersey with Senator Cory Booker, left, and Mayor Ras Baraka of Newark. Officials in New Jersey have offered $7 billion in tax breaks to woo Amazon’s second headquarters. Credit Bryan Anselm for The New York Times Most contenders have been secretive about their bids, but the incentives will probably be substantial. Gov. Chris Christie of New Jersey and state lawmakers, for instance, have offered a $7 billion package of tax breaks on behalf of Newark. Any city that really wants Amazon will have to ante up, and most will find the wherewithal to do so. The accounting and consulting firm KPMG ranks major cities by costs in its biennial “Competitive Alternatives” survey. A score of 100 is equal to the United States baseline, so costs in a city with a score of 105 are 5 percent higher than the baseline; cities with a score of 95 are 5 percent lower. New York City, with a score of 104.7, and San Francisco (104.5) are two of the most expensive cities in the country, making them long shots. (Seattle, at 100.8, is just above the baseline.) Boston, at 101.2, would probably barely make the cut. Washington’s score is 99.4. The lowest-cost American cities are mostly in the Sunbelt; Austin’s score is 96.2. But many older industrial cities also offer cost advantages: Cincinnati (94), Baltimore (96.5), Pittsburgh (97), Chicago (98.3) and Philadelphia (99.8) are all below the baseline. Thanks to the strong dollar (which could change over time), Canadian cities fare especially well: Montreal’s score is 85.2; Toronto’s is 85.6. Both cities also have vibrant urban cores and have emphasized Canada’s talent-friendly immigration policies. “Labor Force” is third on Amazon’s list. The company appears to be bumping up against the limits of Seattle’s talent pool. The commercial real estate firm CBRE produces an annual ranking of cities based on what it calls “tech talent,” which considers factors like technology positions as a percentage of all jobs, growth in tech jobs and tech-degree completion. The top cities on that list are San Francisco and the Bay Area, Seattle and New York — no surprises there. But other cities also fare well: Washington is No. 4, Toronto is No. 6, Boston is No. 9 and Baltimore is No. 11. Conversely, Cincinnati, Cleveland, Milwaukee and St. Louis all rank so low it is hard to see them as viable contenders. Detroit, Philadelphia and Pittsburgh fall somewhere in the middle, but could still be competitive. Amazon appears less concerned with how many tech workers already live and work in an area than with its ability to attract the talent it wants. Seattle was hardly a tech magnet before Amazon, Microsoft and then a host of once-fledgling technology firms set up operations there. Amazon expects its arrival in a new city to have a similar impact. Amazon adds that “a strong university system is required.” Many contending cities offer first-rate universities, including highly ranked programs in technology. Boston is a standout, with Harvard, M.I.T., Boston College, Boston University, but Baltimore offers Johns Hopkins University and Toronto has the University of Toronto and York University. Amazon cites logistics as “critically important,” specifically the presence of an international airport that offers direct flights to Seattle, Washington, New York and San Francisco. (These cities are likely to have a large Amazon presence no matter who wins the competition for the second headquarters.) Virtually every major American airport could use an upgrade, but most big cities have international airports with many direct flights to the cities where Amazon does business. Pittsburgh lacks nonstop flights to Seattle and offers only limited nonstop service to international destinations. But the city was once a major hub for US Air, which made substantial investments in infrastructure there before it was taken over by American Airlines. The number of flights to and from Pittsburgh has dwindled since then, but they could easily be revived. In addition to major airports, Boston, Baltimore and Philadelphia are all on Amtrak’s northeast rail corridor, with easy rail access to New York and Washington. “Community cultural fit” and “community quality of life” are last on Amazon’s list of preferences. Along with the usual amenities, Amazon specifically mentions “a diverse population” and, again, “excellent institutions of higher education.” If weather and independent coffee roasters are important, Austin would be a good fit. Most major cities offer an array of cultural, culinary, recreational and sports attractions, and any that they lack will most likely spring up if Amazon arrives. That puts a premium on diversity and education, factors important in attracting a talented work force. Given Amazon’s vocal support for diversity and inclusion, it seems unlikely it would choose a city or state perceived as intolerant or that has moved to curb civil rights, like North Carolina’s widely publicized effort to curb gay and transgender rights. There are obviously many variables still to be assessed, but based on these criteria and the weight I expect Amazon to place on them, here are my finalists, in descending order: Pittsburgh, Baltimore, Philadelphia, Toronto, Chicago and Boston. Correction :  The “Common Sense” column on Friday, about Amazon’s search for a city to locate a second headquarters, rendered incorrectly the name of a commercial real estate firm that produces an annual ranking of cities based on what it calls “tech talent.” It is CBRE, not CRBE. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page B 1 of the New York edition with the headline: Following Amazon In the Hunt For a Home . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Related Coverage Amazon Counts Its Suitors: 238 Want to Be Home for 2nd Headquarters Oct. 23, 2017 Image Amazon Plans Second Headquarters, Opening a Bidding War Among Cities Sept. 7, 2017 Image Inside Amazon: Wrestling Big Ideas in a Bruising Workplace Aug. 15, 2015 Image Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              