   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Politics Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Liberals Hope Elizabeth Warren Will Serve as Clinton’s Scrutinizer in Chief Video Senator Elizabeth Warren, joining Hillary Clinton on the campaign trail in Manchester, N.H., spoke about Donald J. Trump’s attitude toward women. Published On Oct. 24, 2016 Credit Image by Doug Mills/The New York Times By  Amy Chozick and Matt Flegenheimer Oct. 24, 2016 Senator Elizabeth Warren delivered a blistering rebuke of Donald J. Trump on Monday, warning him that “nasty women vote” and imploring a crowd to cast ballots for Hillary Clinton. “I don’t know about you,” Mrs. Clinton said as she flashed a thankful smile and seized the microphone from Ms. Warren at a rally in Manchester, N.H. “But I could listen to Elizabeth Warren go on all day.” She might have to. With polls and early voting data signaling that Mrs. Clinton is likely to prevail against Mr. Trump in two weeks, liberal Democrats are already looking past Election Day — and relying on Ms. Warren to become the thorn in chief in Mrs. Clinton’s side, scrutinizing her appointments and agenda. Mrs. Clinton has vowed that if elected she will work across the aisle with congressional Republicans, but relations with liberals, including Ms. Warren of Massachusetts and Senators Bernie Sanders of Vermont and Sherrod Brown of Ohio, could prove quite contentious. Some Democrats are not waiting for Nov. 8. With Mrs. Clinton’s transition team considering applicants to fill as many as 15 cabinet positions and about 200 subcabinet positions, the left has begun to exert pressure over her potential choices. “Personnel is policy,” said Robert B. Reich, a secretary of labor during the Clinton administration who supported Mr. Sanders during the nominating fight. Mr. Reich said he anticipated intense resistance to any appointees with ties to Wall Street. “As far I can tell, those discussions have already begun,” he added. Asked on Saturday whether she had thought about her cabinet appointments, Mrs. Clinton told reporters onboard her campaign plane: “No, I really haven’t. I’m a little superstitious about that.” But that has not stopped liberals from voicing concerns. “We need a secretary of the Treasury who is prepared to take on the greed and recklessness of Wall Street, not someone who comes from Wall Street,” Mr. Sanders wrote in an email on Monday. “We need an attorney general who will enforce antitrust legislation,” he added, in light of AT&T’s proposed $85 billion acquisition of Time Warner. Democrats frequently point to Ms. Warren as a model for how to gain the public’s attention in effectively blocking appointments. Last year she foiled President Obama’s appointment of Antonio Weiss, a senior investment banker at Lazard, to a top Treasury Department post, a coup that thrilled the left when Mr. Weiss withdrew his name. If she is elected, Mrs. Clinton will face similar pressures filling cabinet positions. From the left, the most scrutinized of those choices would be for Treasury secretary. Front-runners for the post include Lael Brainard , a Federal Reserve governor, and Sarah Bloom Raskin, a deputy Treasury secretary and former state banking regulator. Brian Fallon, a spokesman for Mrs. Clinton, said that her singular focus was winning in November and that speculation about personnel in her potential Clinton administration “is entirely premature.” Before she became a senator, Ms. Warren, who has taken aim at the financial deregulation of the Bill Clinton era, criticized Mrs. Clinton, then a New York senator, for shifting positions to support bankruptcy legislation that would have made it more difficult for families to receive debt relief. But the two Democrats have since formed a warm alliance. Ms. Warren was vetted as a possible running mate and has proved a potent surrogate, bringing her populist appeal and quirky straight talk to a campaign that has struggled to connect with young voters and liberals. And few surrogates have been able to rattle Mr. Trump like Ms. Warren, who has called the Republican nominee a “thin-skinned bully who thinks humiliating women at 3 a.m. qualifies him to be president.” On Monday, Ms. Warren took furious aim at Mr. Trump’s comments about women and the sexual assault allegations against him. “He thinks that because he has a mouthful of Tic Tacs that he can force himself on any woman within groping distance,” she said, alluding to Mr. Trump’s mention of the breath freshener in a 2005 recording in which he boasted about forcing himself on women. Ms. Warren has directed her singular brand of venom at the Obama administration, in which policy negotiations often include aides raising the caveat of “What would Elizabeth Warren say?” “She’s a very powerful ally to have on your side, but it’s well known that she’s a very formidable opponent to have working against you,” said Adam Green, a co-founder of the Progressive Change Campaign Committee. In the Senate, Ms. Warren recently took aim at John G. Stumpf, the chief executive of Wells Fargo when employees opened about 1.5 million bank accounts and applied for 565,000 credit cards that might not have been authorized by customers, regulators say. “You should resign!” Ms. Warren said in a fiery exchange with Mr. Stumpf that quickly became a YouTube sensation. Mr. Stumpf has since resigned. “Some of the best TV you can see is on C-Span when Elizabeth is going after a bank executive or a regulator,” Mrs. Clinton said on Monday. Though Mrs. Clinton earned an enthusiastic reception on Monday, Ms. Warren remained the more powerful draw for a number of more left-leaning voters. Some attendees had traveled from her home state to see her speak. Haydee Bembenek, 75, of Massachusetts, said it was healthy that the pair would “keep each other in check” as partners in government should Mrs. Clinton win. Then Ms. Bembenek offered a prediction. “She’ll be good to run for the presidency,” she said of Ms. Warren, 67, “once Hillary is done with her eight years.” Mrs. Clinton won over many liberals when she adopted Mr. Sanders’s plan for free in-state college tuition for middle-class families and when she turned against the Trans-Pacific Partnership, Mr. Obama’s 12-nation trade pact. On Monday, Mrs. Clinton said she looked forward to “working with” Ms. Warren “to rewrite the rules of our economy.” But many on the left remain skeptical of whether Mrs. Clinton would push liberal policies or adopt a more centrist agenda, like that of her husband. “I’m going to vote for Hillary Clinton on Nov. 8 — and on Nov. 9, I am going to demand the platform we wrote be implemented,” said Jonathan Tasini, a labor activist who challenged Mrs. Clinton for her Senate seat in New York in 2006 and supported Mr. Sanders in the primary. Concerns on the left have been exacerbated by a trove of hacked emails released by WikiLeaks showing Mrs. Clinton sympathetic to Wall Street and her aides conflicted about opposing the trade pact. In excerpts from paid speeches she made to financial institutions and corporate audiences, she said she dreamed of “open trade and open borders” in the Western Hemisphere. Asked on Sunday whether Mrs. Clinton would pursue an Asian trade agreement if elected, her running mate, Senator Tim Kaine of Virginia, said they had not directly discussed the topic. “Look, we aren’t against trade,” Mr. Kaine told Chuck Todd of NBC. “You never close the door if you can get a deal that’s going to be good for American workers and our economy.” Those kinds of comments sent a shudder through liberals who regret their initial hesitancy to antagonize the current Democratic administration. “Obama had a very lengthy honeymoon when there wasn’t much pressure on him from the left,” said Dan Cantor, the national director of the Working Families Party. “That won’t be the case with Hillary Clinton.”  Find out what you need to know about the 2016 presidential race today, and get politics news updates via Facebook , Twitter and the First Draft newsletter . A version of this article appears in print on , on Page A 1 of the New York edition with the headline: Liberals Want  Warren to Push  Clinton to Left . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              