   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Business Day Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Infosys Chief Quits After Battle With Founders Image Vishal Sikka has resigned as chief of Infosys, citing “a continuous drumbeat of distractions and negativity.” Credit Danish Siddiqui/Reuters By  Hari Kumar Aug. 18, 2017 NEW DELHI — India Inc. suffered a new blow on Friday when the chief executive of one of the country’s leading technology outsourcing companies suddenly resigned, a surprise move he attributed to “a continuous drumbeat of distractions and negativity.” The departure of the executive, Vishal Sikka, from Infosys comes just months after a struggle at the top of the Tata Group , a powerful Indian conglomerate, focused attention on a variety of problems in the country’s corporate governance and culture. Both companies symbolized a shift in India’s business mind-set in recent decades, as they looked overseas to court clients and deals. Their success in recent years — Infosys counts a wide range of global companies as its clients, like the automaker Honda, the beverage seller Diageo — has come as India’s overall economy has seen faster growth. Their more recent struggles, however, have also held similarities, with both companies being caught in battles between the goals of their original founders and a new generation of executives. Mr. Sikka took over as the chief executive of Infosys in 2014, coming from the software company SAP and making it the first time the company looked beyond its original founders to fill the top job. Established in 1981 by seven engineers armed with just $250, Infosys now has approximately 200,000 employees and reported revenue of $2.6 billion in the three months through June. It has steadily expanded by offering software outsourcing services, arguing that it saves money for major companies and allows them to operate more efficiently. The majority of its revenue now comes from the United States, where Mr. Sikka pledged this year to hire 10,000 American employees. (The New York Times is also among the company’s clients.) Mr. Sikka was credited with helping bolster the company’s revenue, sending its shares sharply higher. But he nevertheless found himself criticized by the founders of Infosys, including Narayana Murthy, a longtime former chairman and chief executive, particularly over levels of executive pay. That criticism came to a head on Friday, when Mr. Sikka suddenly announced he was resigning. In a letter published by Infosys, he complained of a relentless string of attacks, which he said were “repeatedly proven false and baseless.” “This continuous drumbeat of distractions and negativity over the last several months/quarters inhibits our ability to make positive change and stay focused on value creation,” he wrote. He came to the conclusion “that it is indeed time for me to leave.” Mr. Sikka will stay on as executive vice chairman, and the company’s chief operating officer U. B. Pravin Rao will take over as interim chief executive. Infosys said it planned to have a new chief executive in place by the end of March. “This is purely a case of founders going for overkill,” said Manoj Kumar, a managing partner at the corporate law firm Hammurabi & Solomon, which is based in Delhi. “Shareholder value will definitely be impacted in the short term, as well as the long term.” Infosys paid tribute to Mr. Sikka, saying he helped grow the company and establish “breakthrough new programs.” In a statement , the company’s board said it was “profoundly distressed by the unfounded personal attacks on the members of our management team” which it said “harmed employee morale and contributed to the loss of the company’s valued C.E.O.” The company’s shares fell nearly 10 percent in Mumbai after the announcement of his resignation. Mr. Murthy, however, offered no such tributes. He said in a statement that he was concerned by the “deteriorating standard of corporate governance” at Infosys, adding: “It is below my dignity to respond to such baseless insinuations.” Mr. Sikka’s resignation mirrors the struggle over control of the Tata Group. In that case, the conglomerate’s patriarch Ratan Tata, an Indian corporate titan, clashed with his chosen successor, Cyrus Mistry. Mr. Tata ousted Mr. Mistry in October, starting a nasty public battle in which the company found itself defending against accusations of wrongdoing. The fight between the two sides has rumbled on in recent months, with Indian media reporting that the Tata Group had moved to cut ties with companies controlled by Mr. Mistry. Follow Hari Kumar on Twitter @HariNYT .  A version of this article appears in print on , on Page B 1 of the New York edition with the headline: India’s Tech Sector Is Rattled As Infosys Chief Steps Aside . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Related Coverage Infosys, an Indian Outsourcing Company, Says It Will Create 10,000 U.S. Jobs May 2, 2017 Image In India, a Clash at the Top of the Tata Empire Gets Ugly Dec. 17, 2016 Image Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              