   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Media Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Brad Grey, Former Chairman of Paramount Pictures, Dies at 59 Image Brad Grey, who was chief executive of Paramount Pictures from 2005 until earlier this year, at the Paramount lot in Hollywood in 2009. Credit Jamie Rector for The New York Times By  Brooks Barnes May 15, 2017 LOS ANGELES — Brad Grey, who rose from blue-collar roots in New York to the pinnacle of Hollywood, where he was the chairman of Paramount Pictures for a dozen years and played a pivotal role in the creation of seminal television hits like “The Sopranos,” died on Sunday at his home in Los Angeles. He was 59. A spokeswoman for the Grey family said the cause was cancer. Mr. Grey’s death shocked the movie capital, where most people were awaiting word of his next professional chapter. It was only in February that he resigned under pressure as Paramount’s chief as part of a broader housecleaning at Viacom, the studio’s struggling corporate parent. In recent years, Paramount had declined badly under his management, a result of poor movie choices and severe underinvestment by Viacom. His sometimes contentious four-decade run in show business ended on a down note, but Mr. Grey — carefully composed and quiet one minute, terrifyingly intimidating the next — may be remembered for helping to change how the gears of Hollywood grind: In the 1990s, he worked to forge a new layer of star supervision and career development through the Brillstein-Grey talent management company. Thanks largely to Bernie Brillstein, a larger-than-life industry figure who died in 2008 , talent managers were an emergent force in the movie and television business when Mr. Grey came on the scene in the early 1980s. Mr. Brillstein took Mr. Grey under his wing in 1984 — Mr. Grey had a couple of his own management clients, including two comedians who were relatively unknown at the time, Garry Shandling and Bob Saget — and they began to blend the art of management with television and film production. Instead of relying on studios to offer its clients jobs, Brillstein-Grey started to create the jobs itself, leading to groundbreaking television series like “The Larry Sanders Show,” starring Mr. Shandling, who died last year , and later “The Sopranos.” (To avoid conflicts of interest, agents negotiate deals with producers and studios and do not produce; managers, in contrast, help nurture, guide and produce.) “Brad helped forge a new paradigm in representing artists,” Jon Liebman, chief executive of Brillstein Entertainment Partners, which remains the gold standard of management companies, said in a phone interview. Mr. Grey was closely associated with entertainment that dealt with the Mafia. “The Sopranos,” which was created by David Chase and chronicled the sometimes mundane lives of New Jersey mobsters, became a cultural phenomenon and helped initiate the boom in high-quality cable dramas. Mr. Grey was credited as an executive producer. He was also a producer of “The Departed,” Martin Scorsese’s film about a Boston mob boss. It won four Academy Awards in 2007, including one for best picture. For a man who spent so much of his career tending to relationships, Mr. Grey had a notable number of associations that turned sour. Mr. Shandling sued him for $100 million in 1998, claiming breach of duties. Mr. Grey countersued, and the squabble escalated, drawing national attention . (They ultimately settled out of court.) Image Mr. Grey with Leonardo DiCaprio at the premiere of Martin Scorsese’s “The Wolf of Wall Street” at the Ziegfeld Theater in Manhattan in 2013. Credit Kirsten Luce for The New York Times After helping Paramount to acquire DreamWorks Studios, Mr. Grey clashed with the DreamWorks founders, in particular Steven Spielberg and David Geffen. DreamWorks and Paramount parted ways in 2008. Mr. Grey was also known for surviving the Anthony Pellicano wiretapping scandal that swept across Hollywood in 2006. Mr. Pellicano, a private investigator to the rich and famous, was found guilty in 2008 on charges including wiretapping, racketeering and wire fraud and was sentenced to 15 years in prison. Mr. Grey was among the Hollywood figures who had employed Mr. Pellicano , once involving his jousting with Mr. Shandling. “Oh, God, I’ve made many mistakes,” Mr. Grey told The New York Times in 2008. “But none I regret.” Brad Alan Grey was born in the Bronx on Dec. 29, 1957, to Stanley and Barbara Grey. His father was a garment salesman. While studying communications at the State University of New York at Buffalo, Mr. Grey got a job as an assistant to Harvey Weinstein and Bob Weinstein, who were then concert promoters. Mr. Grey helped arrange an appearance in Buffalo by Frank Sinatra. Mr. Grey signed his first full-time client, Mr. Saget, during his senior year in 1979. After joining forces with Mr. Brillstein in 1984, Mr. Grey remained at Brillstein-Grey for two decades before selling the company and becoming chief executive of Paramount in 2005. (Another career accomplishment: In 2001, Mr. Grey helped found a production company for two of his Brillstein-Grey clients, Brad Pitt and Jennifer Aniston. That firm, Plan B Entertainment, which now runs without Ms. Aniston, has produced such Oscar-winning films as “12 Years a Slave” and “Moonlight.”) At Paramount, the ancestral home of the “Godfather” movies, Mr. Grey tried to embrace franchise sequels that could sell tickets on a global scale, a business decision rooted in modern movie-business realities. Paramount became Hollywood’s leading studio by domestic market share in 2011, lifted by films like “Transformers: Dark of the Moon” and “Mission: Impossible — Ghost Protocol.” The studio also became an awards player, releasing films like “Fences,” “Arrival” and the documentary “An Inconvenient Truth.” But repeated layoffs and missed opportunities — the studio at one point had the chance to buy Marvel, which instead went to Disney — led to Paramount’s decline. In its last fiscal year, Paramount lost $445 million. Mr. Grey is survived by his wife, Cassandra Huysentruyt Grey , and their toddler son, Jules; his three grown children, Sam, Max and Emily, from a previous marriage, to Jill Gutterson Grey; his mother, Barbara Schumsky; and his older siblings, Michael and Robin Grey. With Mr. Grey’s death, Hollywood came a bit closer to losing its connection to a more glamorous past, when certain customs were considered sacrosanct. Mr. Grey, more than many of his studio counterparts, upheld the pageantry of Hollywood. Upon first arriving in Los Angeles in the early 1980s, for instance, he made a beeline to its center at the time, the Beverly Hills Hotel. “I couldn’t afford it, but I stayed at the hotel,” he told The Financial Times in 2012. “The tradition of the Beverly Hills Hotel always mattered to me.”  Read more obituaries and follow our coverage on Twitter . A version of this article appears in print on , on Page B 11 of the New York edition with the headline: Brad Grey, TV and Movie Executive Who Reshaped an Industry, Dies at 59 . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              