   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Weddings Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Margot Genvert, Alexander Tanenbaum June 12, 2016 Margot Hamilton Genvert, a daughter of Margaret F. Genvert and Dr. Harold I. Genvert of Salisbury, Md., was married June 6 to Alexander Paul Tanenbaum, a son of Pamela B. Tanenbaum and Steven R. Tanenbaum of White Plains. Angel L. Lopez, a staff member of the New York City Clerk’s office, officiated at the Manhattan Marriage Bureau. The couple met at Colgate University, from which they graduated, the groom cum laude. Mrs. Tanenbaum, 26, works in New York as a media supervisor with Ogilvy & Mather, part of the WPP Group, the London advertising and marketing company. Her father is the senior partner in Peninsula Urology Associates in Salisbury. Her mother is a history lecturer on the faculty of Salisbury University. Mr. Tanenbaum, 28, is a corporate counsel for David Yurman Enterprises, a company in New York that designs and manufactures jewelry. He received a law degree from Georgetown. His mother is the librarian at Murray Avenue School, an elementary school in Larchmont, N.Y., and an adjunct lecturer in the “Art of Teaching” program at Sarah Lawrence College in Bronxville, N.Y. His father is a partner in the White Plains law firm Solomon & Tanenbaum. The bride is a descendant of Roger Sherman, the only person to sign all four “great state” papers of the United States: the Continental Association, the Declaration of Independence, the Articles of Confederation and the Constitution. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page ST 17 of the New York edition with the headline: Margot Genvert,  Alexander Tanenbaum . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              