   New York Times Watching Logo Search Magnifying glass icon Your Watchlist Search The Best Movies and TV Shows New on Netflix Canada in September by Scott Tobias Sep. 1, 2017 From left: “There Will Be Blood,” “Narcos” and “Archer.” Paramount Vantage; Netflix; FX Welcome to Watching, The New York Times’s TV and movie recommendation site. Every month, Netflix Canada adds a new batch of movies and TV shows to its library. Here are the titles we think are most interesting, broken down by release date. Netflix occasionally changes schedules without giving notice. (Unfortunately, streaming information provided in our Watchlist listings applies only to viewers in the United States.) ‘Archer’ Season 8 Starts streaming: Sept. 1 Ribbon Save to Watch Heart Shape Like It took eight seasons, but “Archer” finally reached its noir source of inspiration. Taking off from the “Sunset Boulevard” ending of the previous season, “Archer Dreamland,” as Season 8 is titled, reveals that the suave secret agent Sterling Archer survived multiple gunshot wounds but has fallen into a coma. And into that coma we fall, too, landing in 1947, when Archer is a private detective in Los Angeles, exploring dark conspiracies while immersed in gleaming Art Deco, hard shadows and multiple femmes fatales. — ‘Hidden Figures’ Starts streaming: Sept. 1 Ribbon Save to Watch Heart Shape Like There’s no shortage of films about triumphs and tragedies of the space race, but “Hidden Figures” shines a light on three African-American women who helped crunch the numbers to make a manned flight possible. Though larded with conventional slow-clap moments, the film springs to life whenever Katherine Johnson (Taraji P. Henson), Dorothy Vaughan (Octavia Spencer) and Mary Jackson (Janelle Monáe) are at NASA, asserting their expertise against the suspicion and hostility of their mostly white male counterparts. Beyond its insight into the racism and sexism of the period, “Hidden Figures” is also a rare and rousing acknowledgment of the mathematicians and engineers who made the impossible possible. — ‘Little Evil’ Starts streaming: Sept. 1 Ribbon Save to Watch Heart Shape Like Back in 2010, the writer and director Eli Craig made an auspicious debut with “Tucker & Dale vs. Evil,” a rowdy and unpretentious horror-comedy that plays like a hillbilly “Evil Dead.” Craig returns with a Netflix original film in a similar vein, this time riffing on the possessed-child tropes of horror staples like “The Omen,” “The Exorcist” and “Children of the Corn.” Adam Scott stars as the put-upon stepfather of a problem child who’s either extremely misbehaved or the son of Satan. — 0 ‘Narcos’ Season 3 Starts streaming: Sept. 1 Ribbon Save to Watch Heart Shape Like Can “Narcos” be “Narcos” without Pablo Escobar? That’s the key question hanging over the third season, which will have to find some way to replace actor Wagner Moura’s sinister man-of-the-people, whose story ended on a Medellín rooftop. (Also gone is Boyd Holbrook as the D.E.A. agent and narrator, but that loss is more negligible.) The new season focuses on the Cali Cartel, which took the Colombian cocaine business in a ruthlessly corporate direction after Escobar’s death. — ‘Say Anything …’ Starts streaming: Sept. 1 Ribbon Save to Watch Heart Shape Like Cameron Crowe’s directorial debut has all the endearing qualities that resurfaced later in films like “Jerry Maguire” and “Almost Famous” : Heart-on-its-sleeve earnestness, an affinity for grand romantic gestures and an impeccably curated soundtrack. The star-crossed summer fling between the class valedictorian (Ione Skye) and an inveterate slacker (John Cusack) is funny and affecting on its own, but the supporting cast leaves just as deep an impression, particularly Joan Cusack as a practical-minded single mother and John Mahoney as a protective father who’s harboring a shameful secret. — ‘Silence’ Starts streaming: Sept. 1 Ribbon Save to Watch Heart Shape Like Over 25 years in the making, Martin Scorsese’s dream project about 17th-century Jesuit priests in Japan joins his films “The Last Temptation of Christ” and “Kundun” in its deep consideration of faith in the face of religious persecution. As two Portuguese missionaries (Andrew Garfield and Adam Driver) search for their missing mentor (Liam Neeson) in a country where Christianity is forbidden, they’re exposed to hardships that shake their conviction and force them to confront the possibility that their beliefs have been planted on infertile ground. Although Scorsese’s Catholicism is a guiding force, “Silence” is the rare religious film that’s willing to ask the difficult questions. — ‘The B-Side: Elsa Dorfman’s Portrait Photography’ Starts streaming: Sept. 1 Ribbon Save to Watch Heart Shape Like By Errol Morris standards, “The B-Side” is an exceedingly modest affair, closer to the profiles in his “First Person” series than to major works like “The Fog of War” or “The Thin Blue Line.” But his career-long fascination with eccentrics and obsessives finds a charming subject in Elsa Dorfman, an 80-year-old photographer who’s specializes in large-format, 20-by-24-inch Polaroid portraits. Dorfman leads Morris on a tour of her vast archives, which includes candid shots of her friend Allen Ginsberg and other public figures. — ‘The Ice Storm’ Starts streaming: Sept. 1 Ribbon Save to Watch Heart Shape Like Ang Lee’s beautiful period drama takes place among the well-heeled and miserable in New Canaan, Conn., in 1973, when two sets of parents (Kevin Kline and Joan Allen, and Jamey Sheridan and Sigourney Weaver) find their libertine, counterculture impulses bumping up against the sobering realities of marriage and family life. At the same time, their adolescent children are left to test their limits in dangerous ways. “The Ice Storm” is about nothing less than the American family’s having to redefine itself in the wake of dramatic social change. — ‘The Squid and the Whale’ Starts streaming: Sept. 1 Ribbon Save to Watch Heart Shape Like This semi-autobiographical comedy-drama from Noah Baumbach suggests the personal roots of his distinctly caustic sensibility. With Jesse Eisenberg as his 16-year-old surrogate, Baumbach explores the painful circumstances that lead the boy’s mother (Laura Linney) and father (Jeff Daniels) to share custody of their two sons in separate Brooklyn homes. Their affairs and constant fighting have a devastating impact on their children, but Baumbach’s unsparing assessment of his characters contains some hard-won sympathy for them, too. — ‘BoJack Horseman’ Season 4 Starts streaming: Sept. 8 Ribbon Save to Watch Heart Shape Like With each successive season, Netflix’s idiosyncratic animated series about a washed-up sitcom star who also happens to be a talking horse (Will Arnett) circles further down the drain of depression, addiction and runaway narcissism. Yet the third season also found room for a stunning high-concept episode about BoJack at an underwater film festival. Season 4 begins with BoJack missing in action as his canine friend and rival Mr. Peanutbutter (Paul F. Tompkins) runs for governor. — ‘Strong Island’ Starts streaming: Sept. 15 Ribbon Save to Watch Heart Shape Like In 1992, a young African-American man named William Ford Jr. was murdered by a white mechanic at a chop shop on Long Island. Director Yance Ford, then William’s sister (today he is a transgender man), looks back at the murder (and at the killer’s exoneration) as a formative tragedy at the center of his family’s life, which had repercussions that have spanned the decades since. “Strong Island” is a raw, emotional documentary, but it’s full of personal and social insight, too, like the window he provides into the hope and despair of growing up in a middle-class black neighborhood severed off from the white communities surrounding it. — 0 ‘The Deer Hunter’ Starts streaming: Sept. 21 Ribbon Save to Watch Heart Shape Like There are elements of Michael Cimino’s three-hour Vietnam drama that remain bloated or exploitative — the endless wedding reception that opens the film, the ahistorical presence of Russian roulette during the war — but it nonetheless speaks to a national trauma that, in 1978, was still acutely felt. Robert De Niro, Christopher Walken and John Savage star in this film as Russian-American steelworkers who leave working-class Pennsylvania for Vietnam and return changed men. — ‘The Good Place’ Season 1 Starts streaming: Sept. 21 Ribbon Save to Watch Heart Shape Like Michael Schur’s follow-up to “ Parks & Recreation ” follows a recently deceased young woman (Kristen Bell) who is inadvertently placed in a better afterlife than her accomplishments merited. With the sitcom ringer Ted Danson cast as the architect and manager of this antiseptic, frozen-yogurt-filled paradise, “The Good Place” spins smart, whimsical comedy out of the moral and ethical challenge human beings face in trying to live their best lives. The first season gets better as it goes along, adding Adam Scott as the smug head of “the bad place” and closing with a wicked twist that presents a fresh new set of possibilities. — ‘The Other Guys’ Starts streaming: Sept. 27 Ribbon Save to Watch Heart Shape Like Among prominent directors of Hollywood comedy, Adam McKay stands out as one of the few who’s willing to do more with the camera than simply point it at funny people. Just as the racing scenes in McKay’s “Talladega Nights” looked every bit as good as those in “Days of Thunder,” the action scenes in the buddy-cop comedy “The Other Guys” have the scale and visual panache of a “Lethal Weapon” movie. It’s also proof that Mark Wahlberg, as the streetwise half of a partnership with Will Ferrell’s desk jockey, is funniest at his most belligerent. — ‘There Will Be Blood’ Starts streaming: Sept. 28 Ribbon Save to Watch Heart Shape Like One of the great achievements of the current century, this period drama from Paul Thomas Anderson turns the obscure Upton Sinclair novel “Oil!” into an charged indictment of the toxic wellspring of Industrial Age capitalism. Daniel Day-Lewis brings frightening conviction to the role of a prospector who develops an oil field in early 1900s California but comes into conflict with a pastor (Paul Dano) who wants money to finance his ministry. The violent push and pull between capitalism and religion turns “There Will Be Blood” into a foundational allegory about the forces at work in America. — Also of interest: “ The Walking Dead ” Season 7 (Sept. 8), “George Harrison: Living in the Material World” (Sept. 15), “Disney’s Beauty and the Beast” (Sept. 19), “Jerry Before Seinfeld” (Sept. 19), “ This Is Us ” Season 1 (Sept. 20) and “Breakfast at Tiffany’s” (Sept. 21). — Streaming information by GoWatchIt Have questions? Feedback? Read our FAQs or contact us to let us know how we’re doing. Let’s be friends. NYTimes.com/TV NYTimes.com/Movies Privacy Policy Terms of Service Your Ad Choices © The New York Times Company       