   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Opinion Supported by Op-Ed Contributor Why ‘Skinny’ Obamacare Repeal Is a Terrible Idea By  J. B. Silvers July 26, 2017 Image Credit Harry Campbell Skinny is often read as good today. We like skinny jeans, skinny models and, apparently, skinny health reform. It is likely that the Senate, which has just rejected repeal-and-replace and repeal-without-replace bills, will vote on a “skinny repeal” of the Affordable Care Act. What does this actually mean, and what would it produce? The proposal most often labeled “skinny” would repeal the insurance mandate for individuals and larger employers under the banner of choice and freedom — both standard objectives of conservatives. It also would repeal taxes on medical-device manufacturers and, perhaps, also on insurers, with the goal of reducing the costs that must be reflected in premiums. On the surface, both of those changes seem modest and reasonable. But I can assure Congress, as a former insurance company chief executive, that they would lead to a bloated upscale version of the Medicaid expansion so hated by conservatives. The result would be not only the loss of coverage for millions of people but also an even bigger bill for the government to pick up. You have to look at the dynamics of the insurance market to understand this. To survive, an insurer has to predict the risk of costly claims and to obtain sufficient enrollment to balance customers who need a lot of health care with enrollees who have few or no claims. This works because while an insurer can’t know the timing or severity of illness for an individual, it can estimate the average claims of a group of individuals fairly well. In health care, some individual needs are predictable — young people use less, and those with chronic conditions demand more. The only way to obtain a reasonable average is to have a broad pool, like the employees of a company covered by a group plan. The individual market never had this natural grouping, so premiums varied widely, as did coverage, if it was available at all. The Obamacare individual mandate was intended to produce a representative group and to keep average premiums in bounds. But a variety of problems resulted in predictably higher premium rates for insurance exchanges. The mandated coverage for qualified health plans was broader, enrollment was skewed by pricing that favored older customers, and risk-reduction mechanisms were insufficiently funded. Most of those can be laid at the feet of the Republican Congress and of President Trump for his sabotage in limiting enforcement of the mandate, cutting enrollment efforts and threatening to withhold the risk-sharing payments for low-income enrollees. As a result, insurance companies’ actuaries have filed rate increases in double-digit percentages based on expected higher claim costs — fewer healthy people have signed up — and on risks that they thought were shared by the government being shifted back to them. At the same time, underlying health care inflation is closer to about 4 percent. In addition, many insurers have simply left the market because of unpredictable government policy. Others sticking it out have bet that their higher premiums, combined with the loss of competitors, will let them cover the higher risk. They are probably right. The widely predicted “death spiral” won’t happen: Subsidies provide a low ceiling on the net premium for over three-quarters of enrollees. So what will it mean for individuals if the mandate is jettisoned in a “skinny repeal”? Those receiving subsidies will be largely immune to higher costs — their increased premiums will be offset by larger government subsidies — but it’s actually middle-income people without subsidies who will be priced out of the market. Without the mandate, they will just return to their previous uninsured status, frequently turning into emergency-room patients and bad debts for hospitals and doctors. The Congressional Budget Office has  estimated that, in a decade, about 15 million people would be hurt, including independent professionals and small-business employees. Those remaining in the exchanges will be receiving much higher subsidies because of the higher premiums, making them very similar to existing Medicaid beneficiaries. This is why the likely outcome is a much bigger tab for the government. In effect, a “skinny repeal” will result in an unintended expansion of ever larger government subsidies to the working poor. The difference is that those people will have higher incomes than allowed under normal Medicaid or the expanded Medicaid coverage that has been so controversial in red states. Some liberals may consider this extension of Medicaid-like coverage to be good policy that provides an on-ramp for the working poor to higher incomes and jobs with benefits. Yet the loss of insurance for millions of others is a steep cost for that expansion. Those Republicans who advocate “skinny repeal” as just a lighter version of “repeal and replace” are likely to be very surprised at the unintended result. Most important, this piecemeal approach is no way to do health policy. J. B. Silvers is a professor of health care finance at the Weatherhead School of Management at Case Western Reserve University.  Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter (@NYTopinion) , and sign up for the Opinion Today newsletter . A version of this article appears in print on , on Page A 27 of the New York edition with the headline: The Problem With ‘Skinny’ Repeal . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              