   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Business Day Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by For Crumbs, Growth May Have Come Too Fast Video Crumbs Bake Shop closed its doors for good on Monday and prepared to file for bankruptcy. A look at how the company followed the cupcake craze and its decline. Published On July 8, 2014 Credit Image by Phil Marino for The New York Times By  Hilary Stout July 8, 2014 Word went out swiftly through Midtown Manhattan skyscrapers, downtown coffee shops and clusters of snack-craving children heading home from day camp. Crumbs was going out of business. Bereft, Elizabeth Estrada and Dondrie Burnham raced in 90-degree heat from their comfortable air-conditioned office to their favorite Crumbs Bake Shop across from Bryant Park to indulge in, as Ms. Estrada put it, “one last hurrah.” Their faces fell as they arrived at the shuttered storefront and stared through the locked glass door at empty pastry cases that once held rows of cupcakes bursting with rainbow sprinkles, mini-M&M’s, chunks of Oreos and other confections atop mounds of frothy frosting. “They were beautiful,” Ms. Estrada said. “They were delicious. They were perfect,” Ms. Burnham said. But they were not making money. Sugar is, of course, bad for the waistline, not to mention the teeth, but it seems to be perilous for the portfolio, too. Despite the passion of aficionados like Ms. Estrada and Ms. Burnham, investors took a bath on Crumbs, which abruptly closed down on Monday night, a week after Nasdaq suspended trading of the company’s shares. And with that, the once widely popular and rapidly expanding cupcake company suffered a slide in fortune reminiscent of the likes of Mrs. Field’s (cookies) and Krispy Kreme (doughnuts) which, if not shut down, have been drastically scaled back. Connoisseurs could only speculate — would all those frozen yogurt stores be far behind? Crumbs, which started as a single bakery on the Upper West Side in 2003, seemed to be to the cupcake what Ben & Jerry’s was 25 years earlier to the humble scoop of ice cream. It took a basic beloved dessert and improved it with other sweets to produce a sweet tooth nirvana of flavors. (Ms. Estrada’s favorite of the dozens of Crumbs cupcake offerings was the one that incorporated chocolatey-caramely Samoa Girl Scout cookies.) Ben & Jerry’s, which began in 1978 as a single scoop shop in Burlington, Vt., survived and thrived, eventually bought by the giant multinational corporation Unilever. Crumbs went public in 2011 and quickly followed a not unfamiliar path for some trendy fast-growing companies in technology and other sectors. “I see it as more than just the dessert market,” said Reena Aggarwal, a professor of finance at the Georgetown University McDonough School of Business. “More broadly you have very high-growth companies come into the market and do a successful I.P.O. It’s kind of the fad of the day. Then things go sour.” Image A cupcake from Crumbs, which closed its stores on Monday. Credit Lars Klove for The New York Times As Crumbs expanded rapidly, its costs swelled and its equity dried up. It began closing unprofitable stores this year. But on July 1, Nasdaq suspended trading of the company’s shares, saying it no longer met requirements for market capitalization, net profit or shareholder equity. Crumbs executives could not be reached for comment. Ms. Aggarwal predicted that the company could conceivably come back if it restructured its debt through a bankruptcy filing or if a private equity firm chose to buy the business and inject capital. Certainly, there is still a market for cupcakes, she noted, citing the lines that run out the door of Georgetown Cupcake, a purveyor based in Washington. In a culture that even has an entire TV show devoted to cupcakes (the Food Network’s “Cupcake Wars”), many pinpoint the rise of the cupcake to a singular moment — a 2000 episode of “Sex and the City,” when Carrie and Miranda analyzed life and love while daintily munching two delectable-looking Magnolia Bakery cupcakes on a bench in front of the West Village bakery. (Magnolia has since expanded to 14 locations in five countries.) There was little dainty about Crumbs. Sure, it sold 12-packs of mini cupcakes (each in the collection a different flavor). But its signature product was a softball-size cupcake with a calorie count (which the company actually posted) that sometimes topped 1,000. “They were just too big to eat in one sitting, which kind of made it fun because you could bring some home and share maybe one cupcake with four people,” said Roza Jankovic, who came to the Crumbs store at 52nd and Broadway on Tuesday hoping for one last fix. “Maybe people are more health-conscious now,” she concluded. “Maybe we’ve turned more into fitness and away from eating huge cupcakes” Still standing is the micro-cupcake. On a visit Tuesday afternoon to a Baked by Melissa shop on the Upper West Side — where 50-calorie cupcakes the size of a quarter in flavors like Tie Dye, S’mores and Chocolate Chip Pancake retail for $1 apiece, $10 for a 12-pack, a reporter was referred to corporate headquarters by a store manager wearing a T-shirt that said “Cupcake Rockstar.” A call to headquarters led to a conversation with a “customer happiness associate,” then ultimately to emailed responses to questions from the president of the company, Melissa Ben-Ishay. She expressed sadness about Crumbs but optimism for the staying power of cupcakes. “The suddenness of their shutdown was surprising,” she said, adding, “We are sorry to see one of the pioneers of our industry disappear.” Still, she said sugar is not a bad investment and suggested her company had a cupcake for our times. “All Baked by Melissa cupcakes are bite-size,” she said. “So our entire business is rooted in one word — moderation. ” Emily B. Hager contributed reporting.  A version of this article appears in print on , on Page B 1 of the New York edition with the headline: For Crumbs, Growth May Have Come Too Fast . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Related Coverage As the Cupcake Declines, Crumbs Shuts Its Doors July 8, 2014 Image Crumbs Bake Shop Set to Delist From Nasdaq June 26, 2014 Image Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              