   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Politics Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Court Returns Inquiry Into Walker’s Finances to Wisconsin Image An appeals court reversed a decision stopping an inquiry into the campaign of Gov. Scott Walker. Credit John Hart/Wisconsin State Journal, via Associated Press By  Monica Davey Sept. 24, 2014 MILWAUKEE — A federal appeals court on Wednesday removed an injunction halting an investigation into whether the campaign of Gov. Scott Walker illegally coordinated with conservative groups on fund-raising and spending as he sought to overcome a recall effort two years ago. The decision by a panel of the United States Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit raised the prospect that prosecutors could eventually resume the investigation even as Mr. Walker, who has been mentioned as a possible Republican presidential candidate in 2016, is engaged in a tight battle for re-election. But now the matter returns to Wisconsin’s courts, where a state judge had in effect stopped the inquiry in an earlier ruling, saying he had found no basis for pursuing an inquiry into campaign finance violations. The investigation began in 2012 and took place in five counties. While details have trickled out, much remains unknown about it, largely because it falls into a category of inquiries used in Wisconsin — so-called John Doe investigations — in which those involved are generally barred from speaking publicly. No one has been charged. Documents from prosecutors have suggested a theory in which Mr. Walker’s campaign aides helped direct political spending by outside groups, some of them nonprofits, as part of a “criminal scheme.” Among these was the Wisconsin Club for Growth. Officials have said that Mr. Walker was not a target of the investigation. Still, the matter has clouded Mr. Walker’s political prospects and has been a matter of discussion in his race for re-election against Mary Burke, a Democrat and former Trek bicycle executive. At a campaign event with veterans Wednesday afternoon, Mr. Walker said the federal appeals court decision changed little. “That doesn’t alter the status where we’re at,” Mr. Walker said. “It’s still something that a respected judge here in the state of Wisconsin at the state level, who has no political ties to me or anyone I’m affiliated with, has said should not go forward.” David B. Rivkin Jr., a lawyer for the Wisconsin Club for Growth, issued a statement describing the decision as disappointing, but noting that it did not revive the investigation. “And it does not alter our resolve,” he said. “We will ask the Seventh Circuit to correct today’s mistaken decision, and we will continue to fight this abuse of government power.” Writing for the federal appeals court panel, Judge Frank H. Easterbrook asked broad questions raised by the case about what sorts of behaviors are permitted between campaigns and outside groups. “The Supreme Court has yet to determine what ‘coordination’ means,” he wrote. “Is the scope of permissible regulation limited to groups that advocate the election of particular candidates, or can government also regulate coordination of contributions and speech about political issues, when the speakers do not expressly advocate any person’s election? What if the speech implies, rather than expresses, a preference for a particular candidate’s election? If regulation of coordination about pure issue advocacy is permissible, how tight must the link be between the politician’s committee and the advocacy group?” Sending the matter back to Wisconsin, the judge added, “Uncertainty is a powerful reason to leave this litigation in state court, where it may meet its end as a matter of state law without any need to resolve these constitutional questions.” The decision rejected the finding in May by Rudolph T. Randa , a federal judge, who granted a preliminary injunction to halt the inquiry. Earlier this year, Gregory A. Peterson, a state judge overseeing the investigation, quashed subpoenas in the case, saying he had found no probable cause of campaign finance violations. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page A 16 of the New York edition with the headline: Court Removes Barrier to Walker Inquiry . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Related Coverage Emails Show Bigger Fund-Raising Role for Wisconsin Leader Aug. 22, 2014 Image Wisconsin Governor at Center of a Vast Fund-Raising Case June 19, 2014 Image Conflicting Rulings Cloud Wisconsin Campaign Finance Inquiry May 7, 2014 Image Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              