   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Business Day Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Corner Office Don Mal on the Relentless Pursuit of Making Your Numbers Image Don Mal, the chief executive of Vena Solutions, a software firm, says he asks job candidates about sacrifices they would be willing to make to meet their goals. Credit Earl Wilson/The New York Times By  Adam Bryant July 7, 2017 This interview with Don Mal , chief executive of Vena Solutions , a software firm, was conducted and condensed by Adam Bryant. Q. What were your early years like? A. I was born in India and moved to Prince Edward Island in Canada when I was 7. We went from mangoes to potatoes overnight. My mom was a nurse, and Canada was looking for nurses and teachers at the time. This was the Pierre Trudeau era, when immigration was pretty strong in Canada, so we were able to move there. My parents wanted a better life for us. And your father? My dad has always been a serial entrepreneur. He’s owned retail and wholesale businesses. I saw a lot of what it takes to start businesses, and to go in and out of them. What were you doing outside of class? I played a lot of sports and delivered newspapers, but I also worked a lot for my father. One summer, I sold insurance to fishermen. I would drive down to the docks to sell them injury and illness insurance. I learned that you have to have a really positive attitude because you were getting a lot of rejection. Every day, no matter how badly you get beat up, you have to get up again and just keep going. How have your parents influenced your leadership style? I’ve learned a lot from my father, probably more about what not to do. I respect him and learned a lot about work ethic. But my father was a bit more of an old-school entrepreneur, with less planning. I learned I needed to be much more organized. In anything I do now, I’m continuously planning, because you have to manage risk. You have to have a Plan B. And your college years? I started in engineering and moved very quickly to commerce. But after two years, I dropped out to pursue a rock ’n’ roll career. I sang and played guitar. We were a Police cover band initially, playing in Toronto, and then we moved into more original material. We actually signed with Spy Records, but we never really had a hit single. During the day, I worked in sales, mostly stereos, to pay the rent, and played at night through my 20s. I was selling a lot of stereos. I asked my boss how I was doing relative to the other salespeople. He said: “Well, we’ve got a couple of thousand sales reps. You’re in the top 3 percent.” I went: “Really? That must mean I can sell.” I eventually moved into software sales. How did you transition into software? I bought some PC magazines, and read all the articles about what was hot and trending, and started looking for jobs. When I got into the interview, I basically just recited everything I had read in the magazines. Early leadership lessons? When I started managing a team of salespeople, I had no experience being a manager. It was just: “This is how I sell. I can do it, so you can do it.” I didn’t fully understand what different people brought to the table. That was my first mistake, just assuming they should be like me. I learned to be more empathetic about their challenges, and realized they worked differently. Life isn’t like a mold, and you really do have to work with people’s strengths and weaknesses. Adjusting to that was probably the most challenging thing for me. How do you hire? I definitely look for I.Q. Leaders have to make sure that they can quickly pick up what they do and convey that, because a lot of credibility comes from having domain knowledge. If there’s a gap, people won’t respect you as much. I’m also looking for people who are good listeners. Do they have that emotional intelligence? Are they empathetic and want to help others? So what are your best questions? To understand their work ethic, I do ask this question: Would you be willing to leave your family at Disneyland to do something that was really important for the company? Some people have said no, and I haven’t hired them. It’s interesting because I did leave my wife and kids at Disneyland once. It was to close the biggest deal of our company’s history. I left for two days. It wasn’t like I was leaving them there for the whole vacation. To me, it’s not so much a loyalty question. It’s more of just trying to understand their work ethic. But I can imagine someone saying: “That’s outrageous. Vacations should be vacations.” To which I would say: “Well, here’s the deal. I did it. I felt it was important, and I’ll tell you why. It advanced my career. It helped the company, and my wife was actually O.K. with it because I got a pretty big check to pay for our entire vacation because we closed the deal.” And it’s my sales thing. It’s the relentless pursuit of the number. And at some point it does matter. You have to make your numbers. Whether you’re a public or a private company, you’ve got to make your numbers. So you do whatever it takes, without doing anything wrong or unethical. What career and life advice do you give to new college grads? I think it’s important to remind people, especially in this millennial culture we have now, that life is not going to be handed to you. Whatever you want out of life, you’ve got to earn it. We’re in this age of instant gratification with social media. And parents are at fault to a degree, because every time kids have a problem in high school or in college, they go in to help out. It’s just this generational moment we’re in. But the world doesn’t work that way. There’s not always going to be someone there to like you right away or to help you. So if you understand that, and work hard, you can get what you want. Each week, Adam Bryant talks with top executives about leadership. Follow him on Twitter: @nytcorneroffice . This interview has been edited for space and clarity.  A version of this article appears in print on , on Page BU 2 of the New York edition with the headline: Relentless Pursuit of Making Your Numbers . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              