   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Baseball Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Sports Briefing Arizona Extends Its Streak and Its Wild-Card Edge Image Cleveland’s Jose Ramirez doubling in the fifth inning Sunday, one of his record-tying five extra-base hits. Credit Carlos Osorio/Associated Press Sept. 3, 2017 Ketel Marte and Brandon Drury homered in a three-run sixth inning to bolster a strong outing by Zack Godley, and the Arizona Diamondbacks extended their winning streak to 10 games with a 5-1 victory on Sunday over the Colorado Rockies in Denver. The streak is the Diamondbacks’ longest since they captured a franchise-best 12 straight in 2003. Godley (7-7) allowed three hits, walked six and struck out seven over six innings to help Arizona sweep a three-game series from the Rockies. The Diamondbacks increased their lead over Colorado for the top National League wild-card spot to six and a half games. The slumping Rockies’ lead over Milwaukee for the second wild card was trimmed to just a half-game. INDIANS’ RAMIREZ TIES A SLUGGING RECORD Jose Ramirez tied a major league record with five extra-base hits, including two home runs that deflected off Detroit outfielders, and the Cleveland Indians routed the Tigers, 11-1, in Detroit for their 11th straight victory. AROUND THE MAJORS Max Fried combined with four relievers on a five-hitter in his first major league start, and the Atlanta Braves ended the host Chicago Cubs’ six-game winning streak with a 5-1 victory. Robinson Cano homered and drove in four runs, Andrew Albers took a no-hitter into the sixth inning, and the Seattle Mariners beat the visiting Oakland Athletics, 10-2, completing a three-game sweep. Welington Castillo hit two home runs, including a game-tying shot in the ninth, and Mark Trumbo drove in the game-winning single in the 12th as the Baltimore Orioles rallied past the visiting Toronto Blue Jays, 5-4. GOLF Thomas and Leishman Share Dell Lead The P.G.A. champion Justin Thomas made three long birdies on a long, wet TPC Boston course in Norton, Mass., for a tournament-best 63, giving him a share of the lead with Marc Leishman going into a Labor Day finish in the Dell Technologies Championship. Leishman also played a bogey-free round and had three straight birdies on the back nine for a 65. They were at 12-under-par 201 with no room for error on a leaderboard that was packed with some of golf’s best players. Paul Casey, who played in the final group last year at TPC Boston, shot a 67 and was one shot behind. Jordan Spieth birdied his final two holes and was among those two shots back. Dustin Johnson, who birdied four of his final five holes, was three behind. LEWIS ENDS A SKID IN OREGON Stacy Lewis, who is from the Houston area, came through for her hurricane-ravaged hometown and ended a long winless streak, capturing the Cambia Portland Classic in Oregon. Lewis’s $195,000 in winnings will go to relief efforts, and her sponsor, KPMG, pledged to match the donation. Lewis, 32, won her 12th L.P.G.A. Tour title and her first since June 2014, ending a frustrating stretch that included 12 runner-up finishes. She closed with a three-under 69 to hold off In Gee Chun by a stroke at Columbia Edgewater. SOCCER Luxembourg Stuns France With a Draw Tiny Luxembourg held host France to a shocking 0-0 draw in Toulouse in Group A World Cup qualifying. Image Caylin Newton, Cam’s brother, led Howard, a 45-point underdog, to an upset of Nevada-Las Vegas. Credit Ethan Miller/Getty Images The point kept France on top of the group, 1 point ahead of Sweden, which thrashed host Belarus, 4-0, in Borisov. The Netherlands was in third after defeating Bulgaria, 3-1, in Amsterdam, preserving faint Dutch hopes of qualifying for Russia. In Group H, Romelu Lukaku gave Belgium a 2-1 win over host Greece in Piraeus and secured his team a place in Russia. Belgium is unbeaten in qualifying. Two goals from Edin Dzeko helped Bosnia and Herzegovina beat Gibraltar, 4-0, in Faro, Portugal, to leapfrog Greece into second place. In Group B, Switzerland extended its perfect World Cup qualifying record by defeating host Latvia, 3-0, in Riga for an eighth straight victory, while Cristiano Ronaldo’s Portugal edged Hungary, 1-0, in Budapest to stay close at the top of the group. Earlier, the Faeroe Islands defeated visiting Andorra, 1-0, in Torshavn for its second win, securing its best ever qualifying campaign. COLLEGE FOOTBALL Another Newton, Another Upset Cam Newton is no longer the only quarterback in the family who has led a team to an improbable win. His younger brother Caylin made his college debut Saturday, leading Howard University to one of the biggest upsets in the sport’s history, a 43-40 victory at Nevada-Las Vegas. The Bison, a Football Championship Subdivision program, were 45-point underdogs against the Rebels. Newton ran for 190 yards and two touchdowns and passed for 140 yards with a touchdown and an interception. HOKIES HOLD OFF MOUNTAINEERS Josh Jackson passed for 235 yards, ran for 101 and accounted for two touchdowns in his first start for Virginia Tech, and the No. 21 Hokies made a last-minute stand to beat No. 22 West Virginia, 31-24, at FedEx Field in Landover, Md. PRO FOOTBALL Cleveland Unions Will Boycott Ceremony Members of unions representing Cleveland police officers and paramedics said they would not hold a large United States flag during ceremonies before Sunday’s Cleveland Browns season opener after a group of Browns players knelt during the national anthem before a preseason game last month. Nearly a dozen Browns players knelt in a circle and prayed silently during the anthem before a preseason home game Aug. 21 against the Giants. A smaller group of players placed hands on the shoulders of their kneeling teammates. JETS CLAIM EX-GIANTS TIGHT END Will Tye is switching uniforms and staying in the same home stadium. The Jets claimed Tye, a former Giants tight end, off waivers a day after N.F.L. teams trimmed their rosters from 90 to 53 players. The team also claimed wide receivers Damore’ea Stringfellow and Kalif Raymond and linebacker Edmond Robinson. It released linebacker Bruce Carter and waived linebacker Freddie Bishop, running back Marcus Murphy and tight end Jason Vander Laan. AUTO RACING Hamilton Seizes Lead With Win in Italy Lewis Hamilton won the Italian Grand Prix in Monza virtually unchallenged from pole position and moved ahead of Sebastian Vettel to take the lead in the drivers’ standings. Hamilton finished nearly five seconds ahead of his Mercedes teammate Valtteri Bottas. Hamilton has 238 points, 3 more than Ferrari’s Vettel, with seven races remaining. HAMLIN OVERTAKES TRUEX AT DARLINGTON Denny Hamlin overcame a bad miss of the pit road entrance, chasing down Martin Truex Jr. with three laps left and winning the Nascar Cup Series Southern 500 at Darlington Raceway in South Carolina. Kyle Busch was second, and his brother Kurt was third. ROSSI PREVAILS IN WATKINS GLEN Alexander Rossi, the pole-sitter, won the IndyCar Grand Prix at the Glen, holding off Scott Dixon over the closing laps in Watkins Glen, N.Y. Correction :  An Associated Press report in the Scoreboard column on Monday about the golfer Stacy Lewis’s victory in the Cambia Portland Classic rendered incorrectly in some copies the name of her sponsor, which pledged to donate money to Hurricane Harvey relief efforts. It is KPMG, not KMPG. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page D 6 of the New York edition with the headline: Baseball; Arizona Extends Streak and Wild-Card Edge . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              