   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Briefing Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Europe Edition Qatar, Theresa May, Paris: Your Wednesday Briefing By  Patrick Boehler June 7, 2017 (Want to get this briefing by email? Here’s the sign-up .) Good morning. Here’s what you need to know: Image Credit Carl Court/Getty Images • The British police confirmed the identity of the third assailant in Saturday’s attack in London : Youssef Zaghba, a 22-year-old Italian of Moroccan ancestry. He was briefly held in Italy last year after telling an airport security guard that he was going to be a terrorist. Among the dead is Kirsty Boden , a nurse from Australia who rushed to help the wounded on London Bridge. Jihadists have learned that they don’t need sophisticated weapons to draw news coverage and impress potential recruits, writes our national security reporter . Case in point: A man armed with a hammer and kitchen knives attacked police officers outside Notre-Dame Cathedral in Paris , yelling, “This is for Syria.” _____ Video Khuram Shazad Butt, Rachid Redouane and Youssef Zaghba killed seven and left scores injured on Saturday night. Two of them had been flagged by the authorities and one had even appeared in a TV documentary about Muslim extremism in Britain. Published On June 6, 2017 Credit Image by Metropolitan Police • Revelations of missed warnings about the London attackers are adding to the pressure on Prime Minister Theresa May ahead of Britain’s elections tomorrow. As home secretary, she was in charge of counterterrorism efforts for six years. On the campaign trail, Ms. May said she would curtail human rights laws if they hindered the fight against terrorism. Britain remains deeply split a year after the “Brexit” referendum, with growing regional resentment and a dissonance between old and young voters. _____ Image Credit Stephen Crowley/The New York Times •  President Trump took credit for prompting Saudi Arabia and four other nations to break ties with Qatar , a critical U.S. military and intelligence partner. Mr. Trump, on Twitter, accused Qatar of funding radical groups and seemed optimistic about the outcome: “Perhaps this will be the beginning of the end to the horror of terrorism!” Germany’s foreign minister warned that “Trumpization” in the region could spur a new arms race. Kuwait and Turkey offered to mediate the Qatar dispute. _____ Image • U.S.-backed forces began their assault on the Syrian city of Raqqa , the de facto capital of the Islamic State’s self-declared caliphate. A Syrian boy whose photo was widely shared last year is in the news again. Little Omran Daqneesh seems to be part of a public-relations campaign by the government. Above, a map of Afghanistan shows how the Islamic State (in red) and the Taliban have increased their foothold. _____ Video Michael S. Schmidt reports on new revelations about James B. Comey's appeal to Attorney General Jeff Sessions to ward off pressure from the White House. Published On June 6, 2017 Credit Image by Kevin Lamarque/Reuters.. • Top U.S. intelligence officials and Rod Rosenstein, the deputy attorney general, are expected to be quizzed today at Senate committee hearings about investigations into Russian meddling in the presidential election. Tomorrow, James B. Comey, above, the F.B.I. director fired by Mr. Trump, will testify in another widely anticipated hearing. We’ve just learned that Mr. Comey asked Attorney General Jeff Sessions not to leave him alone with President Trump. Mr. Trump, meanwhile, defended his continued use of Twitter , despite pleas from his own staff to cut back. And Twitter users the president blocked say they have the constitutional right to be unblocked. _____ Image Credit Gianni Cipriano for The New York Times • The five villages that make up Cinque Terre in Italy are famous for their picturesque clusters of homes that seem to cling to steep seaside cliffs. Young people are countering their decay , learning how to rebuild the centuries-old system of landscape terracing that allows this improbable place to exist. And our Rome bureau chief reflects on moving back to the Eternal City after some dozen years. “It struck me as a masterpiece obscured by smudged glass,” he writes. _____ Business Image Credit Illustration by Koren Shadmi • Tech titans like Mark Zuckerberg are remaking the very nature of schooling . “They have the power to change policy, but no corresponding check on that power,” a critic says. • In Spain , Banco Santander said it bought Banco Popular , its struggling competitor, for the nominal price of one euro. • That stranger  on Instagram who said the photo of your dinner was “spectacular”? It could be a marketing bot . •  Here’s a snapshot of global markets . In the News Image Credit Christian Hartmann/Reuters • In France , the party of President Emmanuel Macron is poised to win the biggest parliamentary majority since Charles de Gaulle’s 1968 landslide, polls suggest. [ Reuters ] • We are looking into reports of attacks in Tehran, at Iran’s Parliament building and the tomb of the Ayatollah Khomeini. Check back for updates. [ The New York Times ] • Italy’s Parliament debates a law that could pave the way for early elections in the fall. [ Politico / La Repubblica ] • The European Union is set to unveil its joint defense fund to cover shared military expenses. [ Handelsblatt ] • As China begins to take a lead role on climate change, President Xi Jinping met with California’s governor, Jerry Brown, who is a critic of President Trump. [ The New York Times ] • An American  aid coordinator kidnapped two years ago in Yemen was clandestinely helping the U.S. military. The arrangement risks casting suspicion on other aid workers. [ The New York Times ] • We remember two very different men: Alois Mock, the former Austrian foreign minister who literally helped tear down the Iron Curtain, died at 82 . And Adnan Khashoggi, the flamboyant Saudi arms trader, died at 81 . Smarter Living Image Credit Andrew Scrivani for The New York Times • Recipe of the day: Grill up some apricots to toss in an arugula salad. • Don’t expect a lightning strike of inspiration today. Take the artist Chuck Close’s advice: “Show up and get to work.” • Running is socially contagious . Noteworthy Image Credit Illustration by Kevin Huizenga • Behold our magazine’s first-ever all-comics issue , with 12 real-life tales of New York City. • French Open : Timea Bacsinszky and Jelena Ostapenko advanced to face each other in a semifinal. Here is today’s star-studded schedule . • Ball courts and cages in London are a hotbed of soccer talent and could change how England plays the game . • Relax . Don’t succumb to road rage. We asked long-haul truck drivers what they would like to tell motorists, and they had lots to say . • Fashion designers say pairing black socks and shorts is becoming acceptable . This writer disagrees. Back Story Image Credit San Diego Air and Space Museum Archive The French Open is in full swing — and virtually every story about the tournament includes reference to a man who had little to do with tennis. That’s Roland Garros, the French war hero after whom the tournament’s main Paris tennis stadium is named. In 1913, he became the first person to fly across the Mediterranean . During World War I, he was a pioneer of air warfare, shooting down four enemy planes with a forward-firing machine gun that shot between the propeller blades. Garros was captured in 1915 and spent three years as a prisoner, escaping after arranging for a map of Germany to be delivered in the hollow handle of a tennis racket. According to Michaël Guittard, head of collections at the French Tennis Federation, the escape “was nothing short of an adventure movie.” In an interview with The Times back in France in 1918, Garros said, “Of course I am going back to the front.” Garros was killed when his plane was shot down a few months later, a day before his 30th birthday. A decade later, a tennis stadium was constructed in Paris by Émile Lesieur , who insisted it be named after Garros, his wartime friend. Evan Gershkovich contributed reporting. _____ This briefing was prepared for the European morning. We also have briefings timed for the Australian, Asian and American mornings. You can sign up for these and other Times newsletters here . Your Morning Briefing is published weekday mornings and updated online. What would you like to see here? Contact us at europebriefing@nytimes.com . Correction :  Because of an editing error, an earlier version of this briefing misattributed a distinction to Roland Garros, the French war hero. While his plane was fitted with a device that allowed a machine gun to be fired through the arc of the propeller, he did not invent the device. Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              