   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by On Wellness For One Apparel Brand, Staying Fit Is Just Part of the Job Basketball Break 11 Photos View Slide Show  › Image Regina Kokoszka By  Alexis Cheung Sept. 2, 2015 Once a month, while the weather still permits, the staff at the recreational activewear line Outdoor Voices has a different kind of team lunch: a friendly game of basketball, or “Friday dribble dribble,” as they call it. Around 1 p.m., they lace up and walk past Canal Street’s own lineup — countless vendors, hawking handbags and tchotchkes — to Grand Canal Court, about eight minutes away. Tyler Haney, the company’s 26-year-old founder and C.E.O., grew up in Boulder, Colo., where, she says, “casual activity is baked into everything you do.” Fittingly, the brand’s key tenet, “Doing Things,” embodies a relaxed approach to fitness; and through its signature array of crop tops, leggings, sweats and shorts in subdued hues, Outdoor Voices seeks to close the gap between your gym life and... every other aspect of your life. On the court, for an hour, the OV team sweats it out, five-on-five — sprinting around, cheering each other on and soaking in vitamin D. And to keep the high and camaraderie going every other day of the month, Haney has adopted certain endorphin-pumping 9-to-5 practices, which she shares below. Walk — and talk. “We do Monday one-on-ones walking rather than sitting. I’m a firm believer that you’ve got to move your body for your mind. Your entire mental wiring and outlook changes with exercise, and any opportunity to take a walking meeting rather than sitting, we go for it. Blood gets flowing, and you can think more clearly and candidly.” Do a celebration dance. “When we reach our daily sales goal, we’ll turn on our jams and the whole team gets up, dances and does the Wave for the entirety of the song.” Hit up happy hour — in gym clothes. “We invite our favorite companies to Workout Happy Hour with us — dance, yoga, boxing — followed by beers (usually Coors Light, born in the Rockies!) at our office. It’s an OV twist on typical happy hour. Activity is a whole new way to get to know and enjoy one another — and drinks taste especially great after sweating!” Get around on foot — and by bike. “Once a month we commit to delivering orders by bike — walking, jogging, but mostly biking. It allows the team to get out of the office, and makes for very happy customers. I’ve trained myself to think ‘bike first’ — it’s almost easier to bike places during the day than Uber or subway.” Take a ball break. “We keep a lot of tennis balls in the office for people to massage their feet on while sitting at their desk. It takes very little concentration and thus is easy to multitask. I live in Chinatown and love a great Chinese foot massage — I really believe the organs are accessible through the feet, so why not massage them all throughout the day? Great stress reliever.” Consider coffee alternatives. “I put a package of Lypo-Spheric B Complex Plus in warm water every morning and drink up. It’s better than coffee, and gives you vitamin B wings. Energy is the resource I most value in myself; and with a surplus of energy, you really can do anything. The moment you start to feel run-down is too late; got to be proactive to keep the fuel levels up.” Just add lemon. “We get weekly deliveries of fresh produce, so I squeeze lemons in my water all day long. It makes it taste amazing; and lemon, though acidic, becomes alkaline when it hits your bloodstream. It’s super good for you and especially helpful for drinking more water.” Stock up on foam rollers. “I keep two rollers at the office; and any time I start to feel like I’ve been sitting too long, I go roll my legs, my back, etc. It feels good, keeps you limber and gives you moments to reset throughout the day. It’s all about healthy tissue, baby! Rolling is amazing because you’re breaking up blockages in muscle tissue and restoring proper blood flow. Circulation is key, especially when you’re spending a majority of your time sitting all day, so moments on the foam roller are particularly important.” A version of this article appears in print on , on Page ST 3 of the New York edition with the headline: The Hoops School of Management . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              