   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Politics Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Attorney General Is Hospitalized Briefly By  Matt Apuzzo Feb. 27, 2014 WASHINGTON — Attorney General Eric H. Holder Jr. was briefly hospitalized on Thursday after experiencing faintness and shortness of breath during a morning meeting with staff members, the Justice Department said. In a brief statement to reporters, the department said the hospitalization was precautionary. He was released in the early afternoon and was resting at home. Mr. Holder was taken to MedStar Washington Hospital Center. He made jokes with paramedics in the ambulance ride to the hospital. Mr. Holder, 63, has served as attorney general since President Obama took office in 2009. He is expected to step down at some point this year. In a legal career that has spanned five decades, Mr. Holder has served as a corruption prosecutor, judge, United States attorney, and both of the top two jobs at the Justice Department. Mr. Holder has been the Obama administration’s leading voice on civil rights issues, most notably the administration’s campaigns for gay rights and against laws requiring voters to show identification at the polls. Studies show minorities and the poor are disproportionately affected by such laws. Mr. Holder is active and generally in good health. He walks five flights of stairs to his office each morning and was supposed to play basketball this weekend. Mr. Holder is married to Sharon Malone, an obstetrician. They have three children. A Justice Department spokesman, Brian Fallon, said that the department was functioning normally and that Mr. Holder had personally reviewed a statement on his own health before it was released. Mr. Holder’s predecessor, Michael B. Mukasey, was similarly hospitalized after fainting while giving a speech to the Federalist Society in 2008. He returned to work the next day. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page A 17 of the New York edition with the headline: Attorney General Treated After Feeling Faint . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              