   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Olympics Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by The Most Dominant American Basketball Team? The Olympic Women Image Elena Delle Donne of the United States drove to the basket on Sunday in a 104-89 exhibition victory over Australia at Madison Square Garden. Credit Nathaniel S. Butler/NBAE, via Getty Images By  Wayne Epps Jr. Aug. 1, 2016 Five straight gold medals, seven over all. A 41-game winning streak. A 58-3 record. Those are a few of the statistics that sum up the United States women’s national basketball team’s dominance in Olympic competition. And for the other top teams in the world, it is a mastery they will have to overcome in their own quests for a gold medal. “We know they’re the best, and we know that we have to put it all out there on the floor,” the Australian guard Penny Taylor said. In the past week, the United States team, plus the Australian, Canadian and French teams, played a series of exhibition games before heading to the Rio Olympics. The series, the U.S.A. Basketball Showcase, ended Sunday at Madison Square Garden. Canada defeated France, 71-63, in the first game of the afternoon before the top two teams in the FIBA world rankings — the United States and Australia — battled in the finale. The United States won, 104-89. The United States has played and defeated the Australian team, nicknamed the Opals, seven times in the Olympics, including victories in the gold medal game in 2000, 2004 and 2008. The United States also beat Australia twice in the 1996 Olympics. The second victory came in a semifinal game before a victory over Brazil gave the Americans the first of their five straight gold medals. Coach Geno Auriemma said that when he started with the U.S.A. basketball program in 1993, Russia was the second-most dominant team in the world. In 1992, the Unified Team, which included Russia, won the gold medal. The Soviet Union won gold at the 1976 and 1980 Games. Image Asjha Jones of the United States shot against France in the women’s basketball gold medal game at the 2012 Olympics in London. Credit Pool photo by Mark Ralston Australia is now the second-best team, and Auriemma said that, over a period of time, certain federations had put a lot of money into their programs. He mentioned countries like Canada, Turkey, Spain, Serbia and Croatia. In the world rankings, Spain is third, France is fourth, Canada is ninth, and Turkey is tied with Belarus for 10th. Serbia is 14th and Croatia is 20th. “It’s just, all over the world, teams are starting to see the value of investing in their women’s program,” Auriemma said after a recent practice in Tarrytown, N.Y. Australia Coach Brendan Joyce said the toughest things about facing the United States were the team’s depth, athleticism and size. And he said the talent evaluation in Australia was focused on size and quickness. “If you’re slow, you’ll beat certain teams, but you’ll never beat the U.S.A.,” he said. He said that his team had probably done better offensively on Sunday than he had expected and that it had some areas to work on defensively. The more familiar Australia is with an opponent, the better the team defends, Joyce said. And while he will take it one game at a time in Rio, he said, the goal is to get into position to win that elusive gold medal. “I tell you what, we get them in a gold medal game, we’re going to be pretty well prepared,” he said of the Americans. France and the United States have a history in the Olympics as well. Their sole matchup was in the 2012 gold medal game, which the Americans won, 86-50. That year was the first time since the 2000 Games that women’s basketball teams from France and Canada appeared at the Olympics. The French guard Sarah Michel said that this year’s showcase had been an excellent opportunity for her team as it prepared for Rio because it did not usually play teams of that level. Playing those teams in the United States and at Madison Square Garden was “crazy,” she said. Canada finished eighth in the 2012 Olympics. Last year, the team won the Pan American Games in Toronto and the FIBA Americas Women’s Championship in Edmonton, Alberta. Coach Lisa Thomaidis cited the depth of talent as a factor in the development of Canada’s program. Forward Natalie Achonwa mentioned the investments Canada had made in young players. She added that, no matter the opponent, the Canadians want to be aggressive as they seek their first Olympic medal. “It’s best for us to kind of focus on what we can do and how we can attack rather than the opponent,” Achonwa said. “So we’re just looking forward to the chance to continue to compete and continue to represent our country.” Auriemma said the three other teams that played in the showcase might all end up vying for medals. The veteran American forward Tamika Catchings, who is preparing for her fourth Olympics, said the toughest thing about facing Australia, France and Canada was knowing that they would see them again. The Olympic tournament begins Saturday when France faces Turkey. The United States and Canada are both in Group B, while Australia and France are in Group A. In preliminary play, the United States is scheduled to face Canada again on Aug. 12. “We’ve been very successful, but just making sure that we keep that level of consistency in every single game even though we just continue to get better and better,” Catchings said Saturday. “So that, when we face them again, we won’t be the same team that they saw before.” But the countries looking to dethrone the United States will have a tough hill to climb. Auriemma said that with its talent, experience and versatility, this American team could be the best yet. “But they have to prove it,” Auriemma said. “I thought the 2012 team was really good. And they proved it in London that they were the best team in the world by far. But this team has to prove it.” A version of this article appears in print on , on Page B 12 of the New York edition with the headline: Team With 5 Straight Gold Medals Has Only Improved . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              