   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Weddings Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Kate Swarbrick, Jeroen van den Bergh Image Oct. 15, 2017 Kate Marie Swarbrick and Jeroen van den Bergh were married Oct. 14 at the Basilica of the Sacred Heart in Notre Dame, Ind. The Rev. John I. Jenkins, a Roman Catholic priest and the president of the University of Notre Dame, performed the ceremony. The bride, 30, is a vice president in the Ad Sales Network Partnerships Group of NBCUniversal in New York. She graduated from Saint Louis University. She is the daughter of Kimberly A. Swarbrick and Jack B. Swarbrick Jr. of Indianapolis. The bride’s father is a vice president and the director of athletics at Notre Dame. The groom, who is also 30 and works in New York, is the director of business intelligence at WME | IMG, an entertainment agency based in Beverly Hills, Calif. He graduated from Washington University in St. Louis and received an M.B.A. from N.Y.U. He is a son of Aleida van den Bergh-Danser and Bert van den Bergh, also of Indianapolis. The groom’s mother teaches English as a second language in Indianapolis. His father, who also worked in Indianapolis, retired as president of neuroscience products at Eli Lilly, a pharmaceutical company. The couple met at North Central High School in Indianapolis. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page ST 14 of the New York edition with the headline: Kate Swarbrick,  Jeroen van den Bergh . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              