   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Pro Basketball Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Plan B Eased Clippers Deal: Sterling’s Diagnosis Image Rochelle Sterling, left, and her lawyer Pierce O’Donnell, right, arranged the sale of the Los Angeles Clippers to Steve Ballmer. Credit Mark J. Terrill/Associated Press By  Scott Cacciola June 9, 2014 LOS ANGELES — At 7 on a Saturday morning, four weeks after her life had erupted in scandal, Rochelle Sterling was awakened by a ringing phone. The voice at the other end was a high-energy buzz. But the man, a stranger, made it clear that he wanted to bid on the Los Angeles Clippers, the basketball team she owned with her estranged husband, Donald Sterling. The man on the phone offered to fly from Seattle to speak with her that afternoon. Mrs. Sterling agreed to meet him the next day. Then she hung up and went back to bed. When she got up later that morning, the conversation was fuzzy. She called a friend and asked, “Who is this man Bomber from Washington?” The friend explained that his name was Ballmer, Steve Ballmer, and that he used to run Microsoft. Five days later, Mrs. Sterling had an agreement to sell the Clippers to Mr. Ballmer for a record-setting $2 billion. The deal allowed her to remain involved as “owner emeritus.” With the title, she gets two floor seats for all home games and five stadium parking spaces, according to people involved in the negotiations. And if the Clippers win their first N.B.A. title, three championship rings will go to Mrs. Sterling. There was just one big problem that threatened the deal: Donald Sterling. As a co-owner of the team, he had to be persuaded to sell. This account of the last-minute negotiations behind the sale, much of which has not been previously disclosed, was assembled from nearly a dozen interviews with people involved in the deal on various sides. Because the sale has not been finalized, many of the people spoke on the condition of anonymity. The hurried negotiations took place against the backdrop of the Sterlings’ deeply strained marriage and involved some of the wealthiest people in Los Angeles jostling for a coveted property from their perches in private jets, Malibu mansions and Ritz-Carlton penthouse suites. And while Mr. Sterling had long been seen as the principal actor in the Clippers’ saga, he was reduced to a bit player in the deal’s final stages. It was Rochelle Sterling, his wife of 58 years, who emerged from the billion-dollar negotiating table with the terms she wanted. On May 29, the day Mrs. Sterling and Mr. Ballmer agreed in principle on the deal, Mrs. Sterling and her advisers gathered in a conference room at the law offices of Greenberg Glusker in Los Angeles. Mr. Sterling was on speakerphone. He told the room that he refused to sell — at any price — and vowed to fight the N.B.A., which had barred him for life for making racist statements on recordings, according to participants in the negotiations. With little else to say, Mr. Sterling hung up. Pierce O’Donnell, Mrs. Sterling’s lawyer, turned to a roomful of lawyers, investment bankers and financial advisers and said, “Time to go to Plan B,” according to advisers who were in the room. Image Steve Ballmer agreed to buy the Clippers. Credit Robert Galbraith/Reuters It was a reference to a provision in the trust that controlled the Clippers that stipulated that if Mr. or Mrs. Sterling was found to have a cognitive impairment, the other had a fiduciary responsibility to become sole trustee. That legal maneuver, so closely held that some of Mrs. Sterling’s advisers were unaware it existed, capped a hectic, weekslong effort to wrest control of the team from Mr. Sterling. N.B.A. Commissioner Adam Silver publicly discussed the tactic that cut Mr. Sterling out of the trust. “It’s not necessary that he sign the trust agreement because Shelly went through this process outlined in the trust,” Mr. Silver said during a news conference Sunday night. “Donald was found incapacitated and unable to sign on his own behalf.” Mr. Sterling and his lawyer declined requests for an interview. Mrs. Sterling has maintained that she was unaware of the provision until late in the process, according to her advisers. But on May 13, the day after she watched her husband give a rambling interview to Anderson Cooper of CNN, she called Mr. Sterling and urged him to undergo neurological testing, according to people with knowledge of the conversation. She told friends that she was motivated by concern for her husband. Mr. Sterling agreed to an appointment for that Friday, May 16, at Cedars-Sinai Medical Center. Mr. O’Donnell, her lawyer, was well aware of the legal ramifications of the hospital visit, according to participants in the negotiations. Medical documentation of Mr. Sterling’s condition could allow Mrs. Sterling to take control of the trust. This was “Plan B.” They had already tried persuading Mr. Sterling to sell the team voluntarily. At one meeting, Mrs. Sterling told her husband and his lawyers that the Clippers could fetch $1.5 billion or more, according to people in attendance. She argued that suing the league would devalue the team and would leave the Sterlings stripped of the Clippers and without any perks. The N.B.A. had been pushing the Sterlings to sell as well, according to several people involved in the negotiations. At a meeting in New York on May 13, Mr. Silver made it clear to Mrs. Sterling and Mr. O’Donnell that he wanted to avoid a legal showdown that could potentially ensnarl other owners. The league provided Mrs. Sterling with a list of potential buyers, which included Mr. Ballmer, who had been involved in the bidding for the Sacramento Kings in 2013. Bob Baradaran, the managing partner of Greenberg Glusker, soon established the parameters for a private auction, which called for a cash sale of the team to beat the league’s deadline — a hearing regarding Mr. Sterling that was scheduled for June 3. Image The N.B.A. chief Adam Silver sought to avoid a showdown with Donald Sterling. Credit Rich Pedroncelli/Associated Press The N.B.A. also sent Jason Cahilly, the league’s chief strategic and financial officer, to Los Angeles to work as an emissary for the league, according to several people involved in the negotiations. Over the next four days, Mr. Cahilly was in constant communication with suitors, including Patrick Soon-Shiong, a billionaire physician from Los Angeles; a group headed by the entertainment mogul David Geffen; a group that included the former N.B.A. player Grant Hill; and Mr. Ballmer. Mr. Ballmer understood that in order to prevail, he would have to offer enough money from the outset that the choice was clear, according to a person who advised him on the bid. The plan worked. Mr. Ballmer, a gregarious billionaire who is well known in Seattle for his love of sports , quickly emerged as a front-runner. He spent the afternoon of May 25 at Mrs. Sterling’s home, where he described his passion for basketball. He told stories of his time as the statistician for Harvard’s basketball team when he was a student there, according to participants in the process. “He’s just a tenacious, dynamic guy, and he’s got a lot of charisma,” said Joe Maloof, a former owner of the Kings. “And one thing about Steve is that he doesn’t like to lose.” One of the first questions Mrs. Sterling asked Mr. Ballmer was whether he would move the team to Seattle, according to people briefed on the negotiations. That had been his intention with the Kings. Mrs. Sterling told him that keeping the team in Los Angeles was a condition of the sale. Mr. Ballmer assured her that he would keep the team in Los Angeles. He has since said that it would make little sense for him to land a team in a major market — at no small cost — and move it elsewhere. Bids were due May 28. Mr. O’Donnell set up a special room at his office to handle the sale, and he wanted to move fast. The N.B.A. had told Mrs. Sterling that if a sale was completed in principle by June 2, the league would cancel the June 3 hearing. Mrs. Sterling received three final offers, according to people involved in the process: $1.2 billion from the Hill group, $1.6 billion from the Geffen group, and $1.925 billion from Mr. Ballmer. (She had met with both Mr. Ballmer and members of the Hill group over separate dinners at the same restaurant, Nobu.) By the next afternoon, Mrs. Sterling’s team had settled on Mr. Ballmer. They pushed him to increase the offer to $2 billion, and he agreed, according to participants. Despite Mr. Ballmer’s assurances that the team would stay in Los Angeles, there was no clause in the term sheet that would bar him from moving it, according to people briefed on the discussions. However, the league could require that the team stay in Los Angeles before it approves the sale. Image Donald Sterling Credit Danny Moloshok/Associated Press Finally, with Mr. Ballmer committed to spending $2 billion, Mrs. Sterling tried one last time to persuade her husband to sign off on the deal. He refused. That is when Mr. O’Donnell invoked Plan B. At his wife’s urging, Mr. Sterling had visited doctors for neurological exams. The doctors’ conclusions were clear, according to participants who have reviewed the records: A neurologist affiliated with U.C.L.A. Medical Center and another from the San Fernando Valley found Mr. Sterling to be affected by cognitive impairment. From the perspective of her legal team, that documentation was the weapon they needed to strip the team from Mr. Sterling. (He will still get his share of proceeds from the sale.) Mr. O’Donnell faxed papers, along with the doctors’ reports, to Mr. Sterling’s lawyer, Maxwell M. Blecher, that informed him that Mrs. Sterling was now the sole trustee, according to people briefed on the negotiations. Mr. Blecher has since contested Mr. O’Donnell’s characterization of the doctors’ reports, telling CNN that Mr. Sterling was affected by only a mild “slowing down.” At 6 that evening, Mr. O’Donnell informed Mr. Ballmer of Plan B: Mrs. Sterling was the sole trustee and did not need Mr. Sterling’s blessing. Mr. Ballmer was unaware that the maneuver had been even a possibility until then, according to a person who advised him on the bid process. Mr. O’Donnell then called Richard Buchanan, the N.B.A.’s general counsel. Mr. Buchanan and other league officials had reviewed the doctors’ reports, according to people briefed on the negotiations. With Mrs. Sterling agreeing to indemnify the league against a potential lawsuit by her husband, Mr. Buchanan said he would recommend that the N.B.A.’s executive committee accept her new role in the trust as well as the sale agreement between Mr. Ballmer and Mrs. Sterling, those people said. The transaction is still not complete. Mr. Sterling could challenge his wife’s assertion that she is the sole trustee. Mr. Sterling also has a $1 billion lawsuit pending against the N.B.A. And the league has yet to approve the sale; the owners are expected to vote next month. The night of the sale, Mrs. Sterling and her advisers had dinner at B. J.’s Restaurant and Brewhouse in the Century City section of Los Angeles. An N.B.A. playoff game was on, and news of the sale was moving on the ticker. The mood at the table was one of bittersweet relief. Mrs. Sterling returned to the law office afterward. Shortly before midnight, Mr. Ballmer, clad in a striped polo shirt, bounded off the elevator and greeted her with a hug, according to participants in the negotiations. “Hello, partner!” he said. Mr. Ballmer and Mrs. Sterling signed the term sheet, took photographs and sent the document to the league for formal approval. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page A 1 of the New York edition with the headline: Plan B Eased Clippers Deal: Sterling’s Diagnosis . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Related Coverage Sterling’s Ban and Fine Won’t Change, Silver Says June 8, 2014 Image Sterling Agrees to Sale of Clippers, and to Drop Lawsuit June 4, 2014 Image Clippers’ Sale Silences a Dialogue on Race June 3, 2014 Image Show All Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              