   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by The Trials of Graham Spanier, Penn State’s Ousted President Image Graham Spanier on the Penn State campus in July. Credit Bryan Schutmaat for The New York Times By  Michael Sokolove July 16, 2014 On the day the police arrived at the home of Jerry Sandusky, the former Penn State assistant football coach, to arrest him on multiple counts of child sexual abuse, Graham Spanier was beginning his 17th year as Penn State’s president. It was an extraordinary tenure, and one that had seemed most likely to continue for many more years. A man of ceaseless energy and considerable ego, Spanier led the university as it grew from a remote outpost of American higher education into a top-tier public university. His imprint was everywhere. Some of the world’s most-decorated architects designed the dozens of new buildings constructed on his watch, and Spanier had the last word on everything from the shape of the windows to the color of the brick. He performed magic tricks as the opening act at student events, played washboard in a Dixieland band and sometimes climbed into the costume of the school mascot, the Nittany Lion. At various times, he led the boards that governed the N.C.A.A., the Big Ten conference, the Bowl Championship Series, the Association of American Universities and the National Council on Family Relations. His TV show on the Big Ten Network was called “Expert Opinion With Graham Spanier.” Four days after Sandusky’s arrest in November 2011, he was out. Penn State’s board of trustees either dismissed Spanier or, as he contends, he resigned first. A year later, after Sandusky was convicted, Spanier, a sociologist whose academic background is in family and marital studies, was charged with eight criminal counts, including child endangerment, perjury and conspiring to cover up Sandusky’s crimes. The charges were as shocking in their own way as those brought against Sandusky. Spanier had ruled over an empire: about 45,000 students on a stately, sprawling main campus in State College; another 40,000 at locations around the state; an annual budget exceeding $4 billion. In order to protect the reputation of the university and its vaunted football program, according to the charges against him, he let a pedophile roam free. The case against Spanier is at best problematic, at worst fatally flawed. More than 20 months after the state branded him a criminal, he still awaits a trial. He continues to live in State College but in limbo. Where once he strode confidently along campus pathways, saying hello to everyone in sight, he now stays within a narrow band of comfort, mixing mostly with close friends and a few trusted former colleagues. “At first I was just so stunned by it all, I couldn’t do anything,” he told me in one of our conversations this spring. “I was depressed. I couldn’t sleep. I lost 25 pounds. When I got up the courage, one of the first things I did was go back out on the racquetball courts. I found that everybody was so supportive. I was still one of the guys.” Over the four days that I visited with Spanier, who is 66, I sensed that he probably spent more time out in public than he had since his arrest. It was important to him to demonstrate he was still highly regarded. At a Waffle Shop for breakfast, an elderly woman stopped at our table. “You were a great president,” she said. “I’m praying to St. Jude for you, and I’m not even Catholic.” Several players on Penn State’s women’s volleyball team, whose coach is a longtime friend of Spanier’s, came over to the sideline to give him a hug as he watched their practice. Elsewhere, friends and acquaintances inquired as to how he was doing, in quiet tones, as if he were battling a serious disease. One afternoon, Spanier drove us down a long tree-lined driveway to Schreyer House, the president’s residence, where he and his wife, Sandra, raised their two children. After he was ousted, they were given two months to vacate and clear out their belongings, which included Sandra Spanier’s scholarly materials. She is an English professor at Penn State and general editor of the multivolume Hemingway Letters Project. “We’ll just ride by really quickly,” he said. We coasted past a basketball hoop and a playhouse before he stopped near a gazebo. Image A mural in State College depicts notable figures affiliated with the university, with Joe Paterno, the former football coach, at the center. The artist, Michael Pilato, removed a halo from over Paterno’s head in 2012. Credit Bryan Schutmaat for The New York Times “Look at that,” he said. “They cut the shrubbery way back. It’s different. But it doesn’t look bad that way.” The following day, he proposed that we take in Old Main, an imposing limestone edifice, said to sit at the geographical center of Pennsylvania, that was his workplace from 1995 to 2011. He had been inside just once since he was forced out, for a private meeting after the university proposed revoking his faculty tenure. We came to a side door, and I could hear him take a deep breath before he reached to open it. With a big smile on his face, he popped into several offices, greeting people whom, in almost all cases, he had hired. He asked after their families and made clear that he was up to date on the latest office news — job changes, new babies, wedding engagements. Several people looked back at him as if they had just been visited by a ghost. We left very quickly. The wreckage in State College extends out, concentrically, from the child victims to Spanier and two other former high-ranking Penn State administrators awaiting trial on the same charges and finally to the university itself. After Sandusky’s arrest, Penn State’s board took control of the university and moved with haste. It dispatched Spanier and replaced him with Rodney Erickson, who had been provost. It fired Joe Paterno, after 46 seasons as head coach (and 61 years total on the football staff). It commissioned an investigative report that implicated the entire university community in Sandusky’s crimes. Penn State agreed to pay a $60 million fine to the N.C.A.A. — on what basis, exactly, is still being debated — that state officials have gone to court to retrieve. Some of the most questionable and contested decisions made in the wake of Sandusky were driven by a desire to protect the football program from the N.C.A.A.'s harshest sanction, the so-called death penalty. More broadly, those in control seemed to want to quickly turn the page — an understandable instinct but one that has had the opposite effect. Penn State is awash in lawsuits and rancor, with no end in sight. Its board is in upheaval. Spanier was never as beloved at Penn State as Paterno, who died of lung cancer at 85, less than three months after his unceremonious dismissal. But he has become a stand-in for him, a rallying point for those who believe that a panic-driven response brought further disrepute to an already reeling university. When you get close to Spanier, his face looks rearranged, as if he may have once been a boxer. His nose is crooked, the space between his eyes and cheekbones sunken. “I didn’t always look like this,” he told me at the condominium where he and his wife now live. “I’ve had to have four operations to correct serious deformities inside my head from beatings that my father gave me. They had to rebuild me from the inside out.” Spanier has spoken about this aspect of his past on a couple of occasions, but never in much detail. I pressed him for more because the experience so weirdly evokes the troubles that have found him later in life. He is a victim of child abuse who is charged with tolerating and abetting the same. Spanier said that he had researched his father’s life and “interviewed” him before his death in 1985, to try to understand the roots of the brutality. Fred Spanier came from a prosperous Jewish family in the north of Germany that owned a cigar factory. In the mid-1930s, with Jews in his small town facing increasing threat from the Nazi regime, he was sent off alone to South Africa at the age of 15. He never attended another day of school. He worked at menial jobs, then fought in World War II with a South African regiment before returning to Cape Town and marrying. Graham Spanier, the firstborn, spent his first birthday aboard a ship that sailed from Cape Town. His father had already emigrated to Chicago and found work in the warehouse of a factory that made nuts and bolts. The reunited family, which soon included two more children, settled into a small apartment on the city’s South Side. “He was a frustrated man,” Spanier said of his father. “I would never excuse what he did. And I have never forgiven him. But I understand it. He’s poor, he is doing a job that — I don’t want to say was beneath him — but it is not what he expected. He has no self control.” We had been talking for an hour or so. The Spaniers’ condo is spacious and plush, with panoramic views of the campus and surrounding countryside. The building is full of affluent retirees, but the Spaniers are more like exiles. I asked him what in particular provoked his father to strike him. “Everything caused him to fly into a rage,” he said. “If my sister made an ‘eek’ noise, she’d be beaten. Or it could be a slight infraction. We had very strict rules in the house. At 5:30 everybody had to be in their seat at the table for dinner. Not 5:31. And not just in your seat. The curtains had to be closed, the slippers needed to be put out, the table needed to be set. . . . “Or it could be there was something left on your plate. Food was so important in our home that if you didn’t eat something or didn’t like something, you would be beaten. You didn’t talk while you were eating. Eating was eating.” Spanier said that his father sometimes hit him with his hands or fists, “but 90 percent of the time, it was what’s called a strapping. He would undo his belt, double it up and would strap you with it. You’d be cowering in the corner, and he would continue doing that until I assume he got tired. He just couldn’t do it anymore.” The abuse was not a secret, he said, because his bruises were often visible. “Back in the ‘50s, someone like my father would be described as a strict disciplinarian. Nowadays, you’d be in jail for what he did.” Spanier’s sister, Anita Koszyk, a special-education teacher, told me that all three children were beaten but that her father gave the worst of it to his oldest child. “I have a visual image of Graham on the floor, with his hands up, trying to protect himself from the thrashing,” she said. She remembers him being sent to bed without dinner. Their mother, who sometimes tried but rarely succeeded in stopping the beatings, would sneak food to him. The family ultimately moved to the comfortable suburb of Highland Park, Ill., to a small house on the working-class side of town. Fred Spanier’s involvement in local politics led to a job as the town’s postmaster. The beatings finally stopped, Spanier said, when he was 15 or 16. It is easy to imagine that his father’s cruelty was emotionally devastating and left its own kind of disfigurement. But Spanier hints at this only obliquely. The story he tells is about his ability to break away and take charge over his own life. It is triumphal, a testament to the control he came to exercise. “I had such an aversion to being at home,” he said. “We all hated each other. The only legitimate reason my father would allow for not being at home at 5:30 at night is if you were working, so I developed the world’s strongest work ethic. Basically I started working at 9 years old. I worked all through school. Super-responsible positions. I worked like crazy.” The habit of work set him on a lifelong course. Spanier paid his own way through Iowa State. By 24, he had earned a Ph.D. at Northwestern, secured a faculty position at Penn State and published his first book. At 43, he was named chancellor at the University of Nebraska-Lincoln, and four years later he took the Penn State job. His hometown embraced Spanier as a proud son with a plaque honoring him in the lobby of Highland Park High. After Sandusky was arrested and the scandal became national news, the plaque was removed and Spanier’s name erased from a roster of distinguished alumni on the school’s website. The school superintendent in Highland Park implied that even just the vestiges of Spanier posed a danger. The measures to expunge them, he said, were “an attempt to protect our students.” State College sits in the Allegheny Mountains, almost three hours from Pittsburgh, and farther from Philadelphia and New York. Like many college towns, it is a place apart, a cocoon for students and faculty, so pleasant that it is known as Happy Valley. One of the most popular attractions on campus is the Berkey Creamery, which manufactures and sells ice cream made from the milk of the university’s herd of 225 dairy cows. Spanier told me about a story that made the front page of the local paper not long after he started as a young faculty member. “It was about a bear that climbed up a tree,” he said. “I’ll never forget that.” Spanier is both outgoing and a little stiff. He learned to do magic in his early 20s, and I could see why it might have appealed to him: A magician is at the center of attention, yet at a remove. Spanier can overwhelm you with information. When we stopped by the creamery, he told me so much about each flavor that I could barely identify for myself what I was in the mood for. I think he was sincerely trying to be helpful, but it was too much. When he returned in 1995 to become Penn State’s president, after 13 years away, it was to a community in which he and his wife had “grown up professionally,” he said, with faculty friends who all sent their children to the same public schools and stood along the sidelines at the same youth sporting events. On Saturday afternoons in the fall when the Nittany Lions played at home, the Spaniers hosted tailgate parties at Schreyer House for donors and friends, and then everyone bused over to Beaver Stadium. Their daughter, who was 11 when he became president, liked to circulate at university dinners they hosted and give guests their place cards. Penn State was a university on the rise, and Spanier considered his to be “one of the biggest jobs in American higher education.” He was a chief executive, a fund-raiser and a headhunter for faculty talent; he still taught courses, in the field of leadership. He kept score partly by how much money he raised: $3.5 billion in private philanthropy over his 16 years, much of which went into bricks and mortar. When I toured the main campus with him, he pointed out new academic buildings, dormitories, pedestrian walkways and even parking structures, telling me the story behind each one. He described the career-development center as “maybe the best in the country.” Various academic departments were either “the best,” “one of the best” or “in the Top 10.” Over the last two and a half years, a series of storms has seemed to rip through the valley. In March 2011, The Harrisburg Patriot-News broke the story that a grand jury was looking into allegations of sex abuse involving “Penn State football legend Jerry Sandusky.” Rumors about Sandusky and the investigation were already circulating on Internet message boards devoted to Penn State football. Spanier has been criticized for not informing the university’s board about the investigation more fully, but the board, which had a reputation for passivity, did not aggressively seek information even as leaks trickled out. At the time, Spanier was in the midst of a fund-raising campaign that would ultimately bring in $2.2 billion. He was busy with a broad range of matters external to Penn State too, including his role as chairman of something called the National Security Higher Education Advisory Board, serving, basically, as a liaison between America’s colleges and universities and the F.B.I. and other agencies. On the day Sandusky was charged, Nov. 5, 2011, a Saturday, prosecutors also charged Gary Schultz, the university’s senior vice president for finance and business, and Tim Curley, the athletic director, with perjury and having known about complaints of sexual abuse and failing to report them to the proper authorities. Between them, they had worked more than 70 years at Penn State. Both have pleaded not guilty to the charges. Spanier told me he was stunned at the breadth of the charges against Sandusky. He had known that the former coach was being investigated for an incident involving one child in a university locker room. Now he saw it was much more. But neither Spanier nor anyone else seemed to realize, at least at first, that the indictment of the two administrators broadened the narrative — it brought the university into the story. You could chalk this up to Penn State’s insularity and to a lack of sophistication on the part of Spanier and other decision makers — or perhaps to their wishful thinking that this would all somehow quickly blow over. “On the first day, the magnitude of this was not completely felt,” Spanier said. “We had no idea that two or three or 400 reporters would descend on State College, and we would have to close off streets to accommodate satellite trucks.” Spanier believed that he was good at navigating the university through trouble, and he thought he could do so here. He issued a statement in support of Schultz and Curley. “I thought it would all get cleared up, and they would be put back on the job,” he said. “That’s what I really believed was going to happen.” Even as the situation began to spin into chaos, he continued to try to manage it. He told Curley that he had to go on paid leave and Schultz, who had come back from retirement once, that he had to retire again. He told his staff in Old Main to carry on. Over the next several days, Spanier met with the trustees — at first in a conference call, though many of them would soon arrive on campus. On Sunday night, the trustees told him that he should not issue any statements without their approval. An ally on the board, Spanier said, told him he might be forced out, which he did not believe at first. By Tuesday, realizing that he had been sidelined, he hired a lawyer to deal with his separation from the university. The next morning, Spanier said he submitted a resignation letter to the trustees, which they did not release. That night, the trustees announced that Spanier was out. Spanier’s children were at the president’s residence, having been summoned by his wife. In relating this to me, he began to cry and could not continue for a moment. It was the only time this happened in our many hours of conversation. The trustees commissioned Louis Freeh, the former director of the F.B.I., to investigate how Sandusky, who was still awaiting trial, had been able to exploit children, some of them on campus, for more than a decade. The mission Freeh was given seemed to presuppose that Sandusky’s crimes were not his alone and that people who had reason to suspect him had looked away. The ongoing scandals involving sexually abusive Catholic priests and their superiors who moved them from parish to parish loomed in the background. But that was a systemic failure, an intricate web of deceit, that had persisted for decades. No one was suggesting that Sandusky was part of some nationwide trend of college football coaches who molest children. The impulse at Penn State, however, was to try to determine if Sandusky’s pathology was connected to something larger. Freeh, who was a prosecutor and later a federal judge before he led the F.B.I., was in private practice and in demand for these types of independent investigations, and the reports he issued carried the weight of his stature. He assembled a team of investigators that included, as he would point out, a lawyer who was a former Navy Seal. The university paid Freeh’s law firm a fee of $8.2 million. The practice of commissioning independent reports, like Freeh’s, goes back decades. The investigations rarely follow the rules that pertain to criminal prosecution in U.S. courts; for example, individuals implicated in wrongdoing, who would be called defendants in a courtroom, do not usually get to mount a defense. The resulting reports are often more akin to indictments than verdicts. On July 12, 2012, Freeh issued his 267-page account of what occurred at Penn State. Some of the writing was of the type meant to impress, or perhaps overwhelm, a reader with the firepower that his team brought to the job. The report states that investigators conducted 430 interviews of “key university personnel and other knowledgeable individuals” and that “over 3.5 million pieces of pertinent electronic data and documents” were analyzed. (This would have required examining an average of 15,000 items a day over the course of the investigation, which lasted nearly eight months. It seems likely that many of the documents were merely scanned electronically for keywords.) The Freeh Report was blistering in its tone and stunning in its reach. “The most saddening finding by the Special Investigative Counsel is the total and consistent disregard by the most senior leaders at Penn State for the safety and welfare of Sandusky’s child victims,” the report stated. It then named those leaders — Spanier, Paterno, Schultz and Curley — and said they had “failed to protect against a child sexual predator harming children for over a decade.” Schultz and Curley had already been charged; Spanier had not, but Freeh’s report probably led to his indictment. The fourth man held culpable, Paterno, was dead. The criminal charges against Spanier stem largely from emails between Schultz, Curley and Spanier. One set of emails related to an episode in 1998 in which Sandusky was said to have showered with a boy in a Penn State locker room and hugged him. Spanier was copied on one email from Curley, the athletic director, that was elliptical and did not include Sandusky’s name. A second said that the incident had been resolved satisfactorily. Spanier did not reply. He had met Sandusky, who left the football staff a few years into his presidency, but he did not know him well. Spanier told me that he religiously returned emails addressed to him, but not always those he was copied on. In his grand-jury testimony in 2011, he said that he had no memory of any allegations in 1998 against Sandusky, and after the emails came to light, he discovered that he had been traveling on university business in Europe when the second one landed in his inbox. It is not clear what Spanier’s active involvement in the 1998 case would have achieved. The allegations against Sandusky that year were investigated — by campus and the local police and a caseworker from the state’s Department of Public Welfare — and he was not charged. Spanier could face a more difficult challenge explaining an email from 2001. It relates to the best-known chapter in the Sandusky affair, involving a Penn State assistant coach, Mike McQueary, who reported witnessing Sandusky in a shower with a young boy. McQueary has given differing accounts about what he saw and what he told others in the days that followed. But he has been consistent in saying that he did not stay long enough to look more closely, and did not try to intervene, because he was too upset after hearing a “a skin-on-skin smacking sound.” Seeing Sandusky behind the boy and “slowly moving his hips,” McQueary testified at Sandusky’s trial in 2012, “was more than my brain could handle. I was making decisions on the fly. I picked up the phone and called my father to get advice from the person I trusted most in my life, because I just saw something ridiculous.” McQueary went to Paterno’s house the next day to report what he saw. Soon after, Paterno talked to Schultz and Curley. Spanier said he never spoke to McQueary, but the two administrators informed him about what they were told. The key question, if Spanier and his co-defendants come to trial, is likely to be not what McQueary witnessed, but how he later described what he witnessed. Did he use a sufficiently descriptive term for what he apparently believed he had seen — anal rape — or did his squeamishness cause him to use less stark language? And was that same language passed up the chain of command to Spanier? According to emails and Schultz’s notes, Spanier and the two administrators agreed on a plan: They would inform the board chairman at Second Mile (the charity that Sandusky founded), alert child-welfare authorities and tell Sandusky that he could no longer bring children into Penn State’s locker rooms. Not long after that, Curley wrote to Schultz and Spanier to say that he had changed his mind about going to the child-welfare authorities. Instead, he would urge Sandusky to get help. “This approach is acceptable to me,” Spanier wrote in response. “The only downside for us is if the message isn’t ‘heard’ and acted upon, and we then become vulnerable for not having reported it. But that can be assessed down the road. The approach you outline is humane and a reasonable way to proceed.” Image Spanier, left, and Joe Paterno at a 2011 Penn State football game. Credit Gene Puskar/Associated Press Spanier told me that his meetings about Sandusky were brief, came amid the crush of other university business and coincided with another troubling issue — allegations that a Penn State employee had embezzled money. “The life of a university president is you have things coming at you all day long,” he said. “It’s one crisis after another, one issue after another.” When Spanier told me about his own abuse, he was at his most animated and easiest to know. He was less expressive about its aftereffects, the things he still carries with him from this part of his childhood. “There’s a part of me that always held this background of mine at a distance,” he said. He knows that it probably drove him toward his academic specialty. It made him vow to have a good marriage and gave him an “an aversion to violence of any kind.” Shouldn’t this background have made him more alert to Sandusky even if the reports he heard were nonspecific or couched in euphemism? Shouldn’t he have at least pressed for more information? He said he would have if he had been told more to begin with. “I’m an intervener,” he said. “If I see something going on in the street, in the community, I intervene. . . . If Gary Schultz or Tim Curley had said to me anything about child abuse, sexual abuse, anything criminal, even had hinted about that possibility, of course we would have said something.” The encounter in the shower, he said, was described to him as “horseplay,” which he believes came from Paterno, relating what he heard from McQueary. “I can hear Joe Paterno using that word,” he said. “I don’t think Tim and Gary made that word up. I think Joe used it.” He said he had no memory of writing the email in response to Curley in 2001, but now regrets that he used the word “vulnerable,” which many have taken to mean that he already knew that something inappropriate or criminal had occurred. “I didn’t,” he said. “I think what it meant was that if he didn’t get the message and stop bringing boys into the locker rooms, we could be open to criticism. Obviously, in retrospect, using the word was a bad choice. But who would think that 13 years later someone would focus in on that one word?” The shower took place in a coaches’ locker room; Spanier said he was told that it had occurred in one of Penn State’s more public locker rooms. Even so, he said: “We decided we don’t want him bringing kids into the shower again. It doesn’t look good. It doesn’t feel right.” Spanier is still incredulous that he has been charged criminally. “What does this have to do with me?” he said at one point. “I never saw anything. I never spoke to a kid, a witness, a parent, Sandusky, McQueary, Paterno.” Freeh concluded that Spanier, Paterno and the two others kept quiet about Sandusky “in order to avoid the consequences of bad publicity.” He then cast blame widely, throughout Happy Valley and well beyond. “One of the most challenging of the tasks confronting the Penn State community is transforming the culture that permitted Sandusky’s behavior,” the report said. It defined the university community as current students, faculty, staff, the administration, board of trustees and alumni — which would include approximately 630,000 living Penn State graduates scattered throughout the country and world. (My wife is a Penn State grad, albeit one who never attended a Nittany Lions football game.) Less than two weeks after the release of the Freeh Report, the university signed its “consent decree” with the N.C.A.A., a guilty plea to everything Freeh claimed. Penn State is one of the bulwarks of American public higher education, with a history that dates back to a decade before the Civil War. Like that of almost all of the big college football powers, its identity, to an unhealthy extent, is wrapped up in its team, which under Paterno graduated players at higher-than-average rates and stayed clear of major N.C.A.A. rules infractions. By accepting blame for Sandusky, Penn State implicitly admitted to being an outlier among even football-crazed universities, with a culture so sick it was capable of nurturing and harboring a serial child molester. Freeh’s references to the Penn State community and culture were not received as some airy metaphor. “When that report talks about a corrupt culture, that’s me,” John S. Nichols, an emeritus professor from the College of Communications and former chairman of the faculty senate, said when I spoke with him in State College. “I take it personally. It says there was a conspiracy to cover up child sexual assault to protect the image of football, and that it was carried out by these four people and that the community had culpability as well. That did not happen.” Referring to the pending criminal cases, he said, “Call me old-fashioned, but I still believe in the presumption of innocence.” Sandusky retired from Penn State in 1999. Some of the charges he was convicted of occurred after that. It was highly unusual, if not unprecedented, for the N.C.A.A. to issue sanctions for infractions so far removed from a current team or its coaches. The $60 million fine, to be paid to the N.C.A.A. in five annual installments, was to fund unspecified programs related to child sexual abuse. Penn State’s football team was banned from playing in bowl games, and the number of scholarships it could offer was reduced. Its victories between 1998 and 2011 were “vacated” — wiped from the record books and from Paterno’s career win-loss record. About 30 former chairmen of Penn State’s faculty senate signed a statement denouncing the school’s surrender. They noted that the consent decree actually went beyond the Freeh report in its censure. Football at Penn State, the decree said, was “held in higher esteem than the values of the institution, the values of the N.C.A.A., the values of higher education, and most disturbingly the values of human decency.” There is no mystery why Penn State signed the document — it was under duress. The N.C.A.A. was threatening to shut the football program down for as long as four years, a rare punishment colloquially referred to as the death penalty. Rodney Erickson, Spanier’s successor, told the ESPN news program “Outside the Lines” that he signed the decree to save Penn State football. “I think the death penalty would have been far, far worse for the program and the university over the long run,” he said. It was a remarkable admission. Penn State had been held to account for being so focused on football that it was blinded to more important human values. It then agreed to a document crafted to save football. Dick Thornburgh, the former U.S. attorney general and two-term governor of Pennsylvania, was hired by the Paterno family to review the Freeh Report. His own report, released last year, noted that Freeh quoted some witnesses anonymously, leaving no way to assess their credibility, and made liberal use of grand-jury testimony, which is elicited by a prosecutor and not cross-examined. Many key witnesses were not interviewed by Freeh’s team, including McQueary. The report quoted from his testimony. Freeh, who did not respond to my interview requests, did talk to Spanier, but less than a week before he issued his report. “By then, I’m sure that the report was already written,” Thornburgh said. “Anyone who has ever participated in one of these investigations would know that to be the case.” While expressing respect for Freeh, Thornburgh considers the report so flawed as to call into question all of its findings relating to the individuals it names as well as the supposed guilt of the Penn State community. “The language that I find most objectionable is the charge that Paterno and others, in order to avoid the consequences of bad publicity, repeatedly concealed facts relating to Sandusky’s child abuse,” Thornburgh said when I interviewed him at his Washington office in May. “There is no factual basis in the record for that whatsoever. I challenge anybody to find it. It’s outrageous.” Thornburgh added energy and ammunition to a movement — one that now includes a bloc on Penn State’s board — that seeks to disavow the Freeh Report and the N.C.A.A. consent decree. Nine trustees on the 32-member board are alumni representatives, chosen by elections open to all Penn State graduates; all nine, elected over the last three years, oppose the university’s post-Sandusky response. One of the new board members elected this spring is a former lieutenant governor of Pennsylvania. Another is a clinical psychologist and professor at St. John’s University in Queens. A third is Al Lord, a former chief executive of the student-loan firm Sallie Mae, whose voice struck me as one that would not be easily hushed in State College. I asked Lord what kinds of questions he planned to ask the board’s leadership. “For starters, why are we paying 60 million bucks to the N.C.A.A.?” he said. “Why are we paying anything? What did we do wrong? We had a C.E.O. who knew about this? Well, we haven’t proven that.” (Spanier has filed notice in state court that he intends to sue Freeh for defamation. Lord told me that he has been assisting in that effort, and when I asked how, he said, “Financially.”) Lisa Powers, director of Penn State’s department of public information, said that no member of Penn State’s current administration would consent to an interview. The university has already paid a steep financial price: Including Freeh’s fee, it has spent nearly $37 million on various public-relations firms, lawyers and crisis managers to guide it through Sandusky-related issues. It has agreed to pay $60 million in compensation to Sandusky’s victims . The university is paying most of the legal fees of Spanier, Schultz, Curley and a range of others who were indemnified as employees — about $8.6 million so far. Penn State’s position is that it wants to look forward rather than back. Many faculty members and alumni say the past decisions must first be reconsidered. “Everything that’s been done is right out of the corporate playbook,” Nichols, the former faculty senate president, said. “Take a huge write-down. Fire a few people. Express maximum contrition. And move on. But a university is not a corporation. Not to sound too high-minded, but the purpose of a university is to seek truth and advance knowledge, and we’re a long way from having done that.” It’s fair to say the legal proceedings involving Spanier have been tangled, inexplicably delayed and bizarre. His lawyers have filed motions to have the criminal charges dismissed, beginning in March 2013, and those motions have been sitting in the docket for a year and a half without a ruling. The key point of contention involves a lawyer who Spanier believed was representing him but later testified against him. In 2011, when he appeared before a grand jury sitting in Harrisburg, he was accompanied by Cynthia Baldwin, Penn State’s general counsel at the time, a former justice on the state’s Supreme Court and a past chairwoman of Penn State’s board. In chambers, and outside Spanier’s presence, the supervising judge, Barry Feudale, asked, “Cindy, just for the record, who do you represent?” “The university,” she responded, according to a transcript of the proceeding. “The university solely?” he asked. “Yes, I represent the university solely,” she said. A few minutes later, in the grand-jury room, the prosecutor asked Spanier to identify his counsel before he began his testimony. “Cynthia Baldwin, sitting behind me,” he said. It is not uncommon for corporate lawyers to sit in grand-jury proceedings to represent witnesses who are testifying as “agents” of the corporation. This is what Baldwin’s lawyers have argued she was doing. Baldwin would later give grand-jury testimony against Spanier. According to the transcript, she revealed details of conversations with Spanier as she prepped him first for an interview with investigators looking into the Sandusky case and later for his grand-jury testimony. She said Spanier had withheld information that she had been asked to gather by investigators targeting Sandusky, and that she did not consider him an honest man. Two key figures in Spanier’s case are no longer in their positions. Frank Fina, the initial prosecutor, left after clashing with the state’s new attorney general over a sting operation in Philadelphia that he led. The grand-jury judge, Feudale, who was already at odds with the state’s attorney general, was relieved of his duties after he brandished a 10-inch Gurkha knife in front of a secretary in the attorney general’s office. He protested he was just showing it off for interest and had been tarred as “some wing nut with a Gurkha knife.” That Graham Spanier would appear before a grand jury without his own criminal lawyer would seem to reveal a surprising lack of guile — or perhaps the overconfidence of a man who figures he can handle anything on his own and control the outcome. “This is going to sound really stupid,” he said. “It is stupid. Naïve and stupid. But I was looking forward to meeting with them. I thought I was helping. I was excited about having the experience of going to a grand jury and helping them with their investigation, whatever it was.” Prosecutors make decisions all the time on whether to bring charges. Some are obvious — body on the street, a man standing over it with a gun. The Spanier case seems less so. He did not ask questions or show any curiosity, and only he knows why. No one went looking for the boy in the shower in 2001 or even tried to find out his name. Maybe Spanier, Schultz and Curley were as squeamish as McQueary and just as afraid to look more closely. Whatever the reasons, they did not cover themselves in glory. Whether that equates to criminal behavior is yet to be determined. Wes Oliver, a law-school professor at Duquesne, in Pittsburgh, provided television commentary on the Sandusky trial and has been following the proceedings against Spanier. “I don’t even know what guilt means in this case,” he told me. “What exactly does it mean to fail to supervise a former coach who you happen to know brings kids to your campus? What kind of duty exists there? If anything, it’s a sin of omission. There are sins of omission for which people are punished, but I don’t know if that will happen here or if it should happen.” When I was in State College, Sandra Spanier was just back from Cuba, where she has been involved in restoring Hemingway’s house. “In some ways, my life is still good,” she said. “But you wake up in the morning and you look outside and think, It’s a beautiful day. And then it hits you. It’s still here. This is all still happening. You can’t get away from it.” Graham Spanier was eager to be interviewed for this article and persuaded his lawyers it was a good idea (or at least won their acquiescence). He wants to tell his story and clear his name. On the first day we were together, he said: “In all of my sleepless nights, really every night for a couple of years, when I was lying in bed, all I was doing was imagining being on the witness stand. I was telling the truth and laying it out there.” He spends a lot of his days emailing and talking to his lawyers. He keeps in touch with a web of supporters around the country and still mentors some upperclassmen who were on campus during his presidency. One night, eight students who had been in his Presidential Leadership Academy, a select group of top achievers, came over to the condo. He served cookies he baked himself, asked about their future plans and put on a brief magic show — card tricks and sleight of hand. The students took turns coming forward, and he pulled coins from their ears and so forth. It was sweet, strange and a little sad. None of them asked about his legal troubles. He sent them off with leftover cookies. Penn State did not follow through on revoking his tenure, but Spanier is not teaching. Officially, he has been suspended. He can’t sign up for a flu shot or access the library’s databases. For a time, the court required him to provide a detailed itinerary when he wanted to travel out of state. He was denied permission to attend a conference in Saudi Arabia. “As if I was going to hide out there,” he said. “A Jewish guy, in the desert.” Spanier had imagined that after he stepped down as president, he would take a sabbatical and then return to the faculty. “That’s what former presidents do. They disappear for a while, give their successors some room, then come back. They’re elder statesmen.” He tries not to think about his future or worry if he’ll ever work again. “I know I’ll never be a university president again.” Every once in a while he hears something that feels like someone is thinking about him for a job. “As these things come up, I allow myself to get excited, and then I realize it’s not going to happen.” Spanier just turned 66. “The clock,” he said, “is ticking.” A version of this article appears in print on , on Page 24 of the Sunday Magazine with the headline: The Shadow of the Valley . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Related Coverage Inquiry Finds No Political Pacing of Sandusky Case June 23, 2014 Image Juror Says Panel Had Little Doubt on Sandusky’s Guilt June 23, 2012 Image Rich in Success, Rooted in Secrecy Nov. 21, 2011 Image Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              