   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Soccer Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Global Soccer On the Move, and Not Just to World Cup Image Rickie Lambert has made his name with Southampton but when he returns from Brazil he will complete an emotional return to Liverpool. Credit Glyn Kirk/Agence France-Presse — Getty Images By  Rob Hughes June 1, 2014 LONDON — No matter the foul news that FIFA officials generate, it is players who are the flesh and blood of any World Cup. Their clock is ticking. Monday is deadline day when the 32 nations must submit their rosters of the 23 players each will be taking to Brazil. One player, Italy’s creative midfield man, Riccardo Montolivo, will not make that cut. His left leg was broken by a tackle from an Irish defender in London on Saturday night as the Italians took part in a warmup game on their way to South America. Two others — England striker Rickie Lambert and Spanish midfielder Cesc Fàbregas — are going to the tournament that could define their careers. Both, however, are unlikely to return to the clubs they leave behind. Lambert, now 32, is having a glorious late summer to his career. Before he boards the plane taking England westward on Monday, his move from Southampton to Liverpool will become official. And that will complete an emotional trip for a player who was born in Liverpool and grew up in the club’s academy, but then was told at age 15 that he wouldn’t make it as a Red. Fàbregas is another player in transit. Right now, he is one of seven Barcelona employees named to the Spanish squad that will defend the World Cup. Born a Catalan and a graduate of Barça’s famed academy, Fàbregas was put up for sale over the weekend. His place at Barcelona will be taken by Rafinha, the younger brother of Thiago Alcântara, who left the club for Bayern Munich one year ago. The sons of Mazinho, who played for Brazil at the 1994 World Cup, both were also enrolled at the Barça academy, La Masia. Rafinha (christened Rafael) is now 21 and ready to come home. He played last season on loan at Celta Vigo, where his coach was Luís Enrique, the former Barça B team coach who also is returning to Barcelona, to be the head coach. The wheel of soccer is never still. Lambert’s career has gone full circle. He reaches full national-team status at an age when most players are winding down their international careers, a testament to both his perseverance and his willingness to run and run. That Liverpool is paying 4 million pounds, or about $6.7 million, for a talent it discarded 17 years ago tells another story. Lambert admitted as he passed through the local airport on Saturday that he might well be telling his grandchildren “until the ends of time” how proud he was of this late twist to a pro career filled with struggles. At one stage, a decade ago, he was working the line in a vegetable canning factory. Never mind any grandchildren, his Southampton teammate Luke Shaw was in stitches of laughter hearing Lambert tell the media about his “beet root bottling” days. Shaw is 18. He too is on the England plane heading to Rio de Janeiro. Shaw is another Southampton player who will not return because Manchester United is negotiating to buy him. The national team managers know the situation. They need the undivided attention of their chosen players for the next few weeks, but the fact is the World Cup is merely an interlude, albeit a highlight, to their careers. “I’m sure that when Rickie Lambert plays against Ecuador, you’ll see a fella running around with all the joy that his heart can muster,” England manager Roy Hodgson told reporters about England’s scheduled warmup game in Miami. “He’s happy to be with England now that the move to Liverpool has gone through.” Others are in limbo. Fàbregas has just been told he can go to a buyer who will pay the $50 million that Barcelona values him at. It could be a return to Arsenal, which took him from La Masia at 16, sold him back to Barça when he wanted to leave, and now is in the market for a proven winner on English fields, along with United, Manchester City, Liverpool and Chelsea. His three years back in Spain reaped 149 games, 41 goals and 42 assists without entirely convincing his own people, the Catalans, that he was as important a player as he once was at Arsenal. That, in part, is because Barcelona could still count on Xavi Hernández, while it was schooling the likes of the Alcântara brothers as the potential replacements. All these transfer options might play on the minds of players at the World Cup, because, after all, club soccer is what puts jam — or caviar — on their daily bread. Alas, poor Montolivo is the latest player to get so near, yet so far, from the World Cup. He was made captain on Saturday for the friendly in London as he stepped in for the regular skipper, the goalie Gigi Buffon, and for Italy’s midfield maestro, Andrea Pirlo. Both of those senior citizens on the team are certain starters if they are fit for Italy’s opening World Cup game against England in Manaus. So Coach Cesare Prandelli rested rather than risked them against the Irish. Prandelli cares about the health and also the emotions of players in his charge. On Sunday morning, after it was confirmed that Montolivo must fly back to Italy for surgery, the coach had no option but to move on and select somebody else. That somebody is likely to be Marco Verratti, the 21-year-old Paris St.-Germain player who has long been dubbed the Pirlo of tomorrow. Verratti was on the field Saturday, and he was the first Italian to reach down to try to console his stricken compatriot. “Mi sono rotto,” Montolivo mouthed to him. “I’ve broken it.” A version of this article appears in print on in The International New York Times . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              