   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Tennis Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Novak Djokovic Survives Gaël Monfils and the Humidity Image Novak Djokovic advanced to the final of a major tournament for the 21st time when he defeated Gaël Monfils on Friday. Credit Chang W. Lee/The New York Times By  Harvey Araton Sept. 9, 2016 Novak Djokovic has had more fluid days on the tennis court. But on a suffocating day when his body became desperate for fluids, he was grateful to take a victory any way he could get it. To defeat the Frenchman Gaël Monfils in the United States Open semifinals, the top-seeded Djokovic had to endure heat, humidity and a player whose moods and methods can be as capricious as a sudden cloudburst. Under bizarre conditions, even Djokovic’s renowned steadiness was challenged before he escaped a budding marathon with a 6-3, 6-2, 3-6, 6-2 victory that was more taxing than the score would indicate. Djokovic, the defending champion in pursuit of his 13th Grand Slam tournament victory, went through to his 21st major final. He has made the finals in 19 of the last 25 Grand Slams, and will face Stan Wawrinka in Sunday’s final. Wawrinka, seeded No. 3, advanced after beating No. 6 Kei Nishikori, 4-6, 7-5, 6-4, 6-2. “A strange match — as it always is against Gaël,” Djokovic said. He began the day having had one of the historically stranger paths to the semifinals, with one opponent withdrawing and two more retiring during the matches. Through five rounds he had logged nine sets and 6 hours 26 minutes on court, 27 minutes more than Wawrinka had played in his previous two rounds. All of that was a mere warm-up for the athletically gifted Monfils, the No. 10 seed and master of the mystifying. Image Monfils looked sluggish at times during the match, though he livened up to win the third set. Credit Chang W. Lee/The New York Times The rivalry between these players — if a 13-0 ledger could qualify as one — began 11 years ago at an outer court of the U.S.T.A. Billie Jean King National Tennis Center. On a similarly hot, humid late afternoon, Djokovic, then 18, twice collapsed from cramping and exhaustion, but recovered to outlast the 19-year-old Monfils, 7-5, in the fifth set. Again, the conditions on Friday were oppressive — but that didn’t explain why Monfils appeared debilitated, or indifferent, minutes into the match. Djokovic had pounced on his erratic opponent, reeling off five games in 19 minutes. With the set all but gone, Monfils began playing like a 70-year-old retiree — barely moving his feet, chipping the ball back to the middle of the court on service returns, inviting Djokovic to approach. The tactic — perhaps misinterpreted as tanking — unnerved Djokovic. Ahead by 5-1, he failed to convert on three set points, double-faulting for a Monfils break. After holding for 3-5, Monfils even had break points to get back on serve. “I was completely caught off guard,” Djokovic said. On the ESPN telecast, John McEnroe was laying into Monfils, questioning his professionalism. The crowd in Arthur Ashe Stadium was even more bewildered. But Djokovic seemed to support Monfils’s contention that the tactic had pretty much worked. Monfils said he had signaled to his coaches that, “O.K., I’m going to Plan B,” and added: “I tried to get into his head, create something new in his head to see, you know?” Pressed on his motives, Monfils said: “I think it’s gutsy to try that against the No. 1 in the world. It was a great strategy, I think. At the end, you know, if I have a mike, I would say to the audience, stop saying that, you know, I’m unprofessional. The guy is killing me, you know?” Djokovic steadied himself to fight off the break points and serve out the set. When he broke Monfils at love in the third game of the second set and ran away, 6-2, he appeared on his way to a routine victory. Monfils looked spent, bent over with a hand on his left knee between points, catching his breath. The crowd, rooting for a competitive match, began to hoot. But with Monfils, the unexpected is to be expected. The third set found him — however inert between points — at his athletic and shot-making best. Monfils twice broke Djokovic’s serve to build a 5-2 lead. Now it was Djokovic’s turn to reveal vulnerability, summoning the trainer to massage his left shoulder. When play resumed, Djokovic fought off another break point in the eighth game and built a 0-40 lead in the ninth. Monfils stormed back, serving and volleying, angling winners. He secured the set, leaving Djokovic so annoyed that he ripped apart the top part of his white shirt. “We’re all people and in the heat of the moment you make something like that,” Djokovic said. He proceeded to blow another 0-40 lead in the second game of the fourth set, his steamy mood increasingly matching the weather conditions. More break opportunities for Djokovic materialized in the fourth game. At 30-40, Monfils bought himself time by engaging the chair umpire in a discussion about how much time he was taking between points — the kind of antics Djokovic would later call “unacceptable.” Djokovic broke for 3-1, but was broken right back. He called the trainer for another massage — this time on his right shoulder. But his ordeal was about to end. Not surprisingly, Monfils was unable to create a serious momentum swing, double-faulting twice to set up double break point. After fighting back to deuce, he stuck a forehand volley into the net for the break. The finish line in sight, Djokovic held at 30 and broke again to put Monfils out of his misery. “He’s an entertaining player,” Djokovic said. Erratically exasperating, too. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page D 1 of the New York edition with the headline: Djokovic Survives a Madcap Semifinal . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Related Coverage Serena Williams Will Soon Be 35. But Will She Ever Be No. 1 Again? Sept. 9, 2016 Image Serena Williams Loses Bid for 23rd Major and Her No. 1 Ranking Sept. 8, 2016 Image Angelique Kerber Reaches the U.S. Open Final Sept. 8, 2016 Image Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              