   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Pro Basketball Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Outplayed? Perhaps. But Some See Rapper’s Hex Behind Thunder’s Downfall. Image Kevin Durant of the Oklahoma City Thunder during a loss to the Golden State Warriors in Game 6 of the Western Conference Finals on Saturday. Credit Maddie Meyer/Getty Images By  Jonah Engel Bromwich June 1, 2016 There are plenty of explanations for the Oklahoma City Thunder’s failure over the last week to capitalize on their two-game advantage against the Golden State Warriors in the N.B.A.’s Western Conference Finals. The TNT analyst Charles Barkley accused the Thunder of playing “hero ball.” Others have pointed to the Warriors’ hyperbolic shooting ability . But there are those who insist that the Thunder’s downfall came at the hands of the enigmatic Bay Area rapper Lil B, known to fans as the Based God or simply BasedGod, who laid a curse on their star player Kevin Durant. The hex has taken root in the imaginations of superstitious sports fans since Lil B made it public five years ago. After the Thunder lost Game 7 of the series on Monday, 96-88, the basketball-watching corners of social media erupted with memes crediting the loss to Lil B, many of them with the hashtag #BasedGodCurse. (They may even have outnumbered the Crying Jordans .) The rapper patted himself on the back after the loss, scorned his doubters and retweeted a handful of the many memes sent his way. Lil B, whose real name is Brandon Christopher McCartney, is a hyper-prolific artist who between 2009 and 2015 released nearly 50 albums and mixtapes, garnering adoration from legions of fans who endorsed his accepting, anything-goes “based” philosophy. Durant was not one of them: In 2011, he expressed disbelief that the rapper had gained any degree of relevance. In response, months later, Lil B announced that he had laid a curse on Durant. Since then, as the curse’s believers have noted, the Thunder have encountered a number of obstacles in their quest for a championship. After losing four games in a row to LeBron James and the Miami Heat in the 2012 N.B.A. finals, the team lost a star player to injury in three consecutive seasons. Russell Westbrook exited the 2013 playoffs in the first round. Serge Ibaka sustained a calf injury before the 2014 Western Conference Finals. And in 2015, Durant was injured, leading the Thunder to miss the playoffs. Lil B, meanwhile, continued to stoke publicity for his so-called powers. He rescinded the curse in 2012, only to signal later that it was still on. In 2014, he released an expletive-laced song targeting Durant, the video for which has been viewed nearly two million times on YouTube. But despite Lil B’s supposed witchery, Oklahoma City appeared to have shaken off its woes in this year’s playoffs. Fielding a full complement of stars, the team shocked the San Antonio Spurs, winning the second-round series in six games before driving the Warriors to the brink of elimination with two double-digit wins in its home arena to earn a three-games-to-one lead. At that point, Lil B seemed to acknowledge that his curse could be defeated, even expressing admiration for Durant for showing the heart to fight through it. But it was not to be. As the Warriors held off the Thunder in the fourth quarter on Monday, praise and respect for the Based God began to ring out on Twitter. Even N.B.A. teams paid tribute. The official account of the Sacramento Kings, after an exchange with the rapper, told one fan , “We’re just trying to be as based as Lil B.” In response, one fan predicted success for Sacramento in the season to come: “They winning the finals next year.” Related Coverage Comparisons? Golden State Warriors Are Playing a Different Game May 31, 2016 Image Warriors Edge Thunder to Extend Dream Season to N.B.A. Finals May 30, 2016 Image Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              