   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Movies Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Movie Listings for April 4-10 Image WSB100: William S. Burroughs on Film  (through Sunday) The Beats just go on and on, with Anthology Film Archives joining the Issue Project Room, the Stone and other downtown venues this month to honor what would have been William S. Burroughs’s 100th birthday. (It was actually in February, but Burroughs, the author of “Junky,” presumably wouldn’t object to a bit of sluggishness.) Cineastes will probably gravitate toward “Haxan: Witchcraft Through the Ages,” above, in which Anthony Balch re-edited and condensed Benjamin Christensen’s 1922 silent grotesquerie. This version has new narration by Burroughs, and will be screened on Friday at 7:30 p.m. and Sunday at 8:30 p.m. Literary types, meanwhile, might opt for “Nova Express” (Saturday at 8 p.m.), Andre Perkowski’s three-hour found-footage adaptation of Burroughs’s 1964 novel of the same name. Anthology Film Archives, 32-34 Second Avenue, at Second Street, East Village, 212-505-5181, anthologyfilmarchives.org; $10. (Eric Grode) Credit Janus Films April 3, 2014 Ratings and running times are in parentheses; foreign films have English subtitles. Full reviews of all current releases: nytimes.com/movies. ‘About Last Night’ (R, 1:40) This remake and update of the ’80s Demi Moore-Rob Lowe rom-com, based on David Mamet’s play, moves the action to Los Angeles, where two couples negotiate the complexities of heterosexual courtship. Bernie (Kevin Hart) and Joan (Regina Hall) pursue an on-again-off-again, emotionally volatile, sexually adventurous relationship, while Danny (Michael Ealy) and Debbie (Joy Bryant) proceed from dating to cohabitation and pet ownership. Danny and Debbie are dull and likable in the usual Valentine-movie way, but Bernie and Joan provide some raunchy laughs as well as a bit of romantic wisdom. (A.O. Scott) ★ ‘American Hustle’ (R, 2:09) David O. Russell directs this wonderfully pleasurable comedy, a Martin Scorsese screwball that’s very (very) loosely based on the 1970s Abscam scandal and which finds a brilliant Christian Bale playing a molting con man who’s the Cary Grant to Amy Adams’s Rosalind Russell. Jennifer Lawrence and Bradley Cooper also co-star in the film, which is one of the year’s best and one of its most fun. (Manohla Dargis) ★ ‘Anita’ (No rating, 1:17) Freida Mock’s documentary about Anita Hill, who accused Clarence Thomas of sexual harassment during his Supreme Court confirmation hearings, segues from the hearings in 1991 to the present, where Ms. Hill is seen in a context of power as she speaks in front of rooms full of women in her new role as an activist. (Miriam Bale) ‘Bad Words’ (R, 1:29) Jason Bateman, making his feature directing debut, stars in this would-be gonzo comedy about an unwelcome participant and universally loathed champion in a national spelling bee where everyone else is decades younger. Written by Andrew Dodge, the movie has a tough exterior and a marshmallow center and while it would be something to see Mr. Bateman go authentically dark, sometimes it’s enough just to watch him pop his eyes, furrow his brow and show off his excellent timing. (Dargis) ★ ‘Big Men’ (No rating, 1:39) Unfurling a complicated story teeming with masked militants, well-fed politicians, reassuring suits and the desperate poor, Rachel Boynton’s astonishing documentary about the 2007 discovery of oil off the coast of Ghana is as remarkable for its access as for its refusal to judge. (Jeannette Catsoulis) ‘Breathe In’ (R, 1:38) What distinguishes this film (starring Guy Pearce, Amy Ryan and Felicity Jones) from countless others about marital discontent and disruption is the restraint with which the story is handled, the subtlety of its performances and its almost perverse refusal to turn into a prurient, heavy-breathing examination of adultery and its consequences. (Stephen Holden) ‘Cesar Chavez’ (PG-13, 1:38) The story of the United Farm Workers in the 1960s is the subject of this earnest, conventional biopic, directed by Diego Luna and starring Michael Peña in the title role. There is too much telegraphed inspiration, and not enough illumination, which is a shame since some of the issues Chavez faced could hardly be more timely. (Scott) ★ ‘Cheap Thrills’ (No rating, 1:28) The actors play this dark comedy completely straight, which makes it all the tastier. Craig (Pat Healy) is a young father who is desperate for money. He and a friend fall in with a rich man and woman who entertain themselves by issuing preposterous dares, and Craig and his friend become their playthings, to gruesome but amusing effect. (Neil Genzlinger) ‘Dallas Buyers Club’ (R, 2:00) Skinny and fierce, Matthew McConaughey brings terrific energy to the role of Ron Woodroof, a Texan who receives a diagnosis of H.I.V. in the mid-1980s. The film, directed by Jean-Marc Vallée, chronicles Ron’s transformation from a homophobic hedonist into a medical crusader, bringing experimental (and at the time unapproved) drugs to desperate patients. It is an inspiring story, but the movie, Mr. McConaughey’s performance notwithstanding, is too predictable and conventional to do justice to its political and social dimensions. (Scott) ‘Divergent’ (PG-13, 2:23) With this film adaptation of Veronica Roth’s hugely popular dystopian tale, the latest gutsy teenage heroine has arrived at American movie theaters. As Tris Prior, Shailene Woodley conveys a sense of genuine, deep-tissue sincerity, and it’s not hard to root for her, but she’s ill-served by a production in which the director, Neil Burger, gives you little to hang onto — beauty, thrills, a visual style. (Dargis) ★ ‘Elaine Stritch: Shoot Me’ (No rating, 1:20) This late-life portrait of the great Broadway and cabaret entertainer, now 89, is a moving bone-deep X-ray of an indefatigable woman who is described as a “Molotov cocktail of madness, sanity and genius.” (Holden) ‘Enemy’ (R, 1:30) Jake Gyllenhaal plays a Canadian professor whose glum, routinized life is turned upside down when he discovers that he has a double, an amoral actor also played by Mr. Gyllenhaal. Adapting a novella by the Portuguese Nobel laureate José Saramago, Denis Villeneuve (“Incendies,” “Prisoners”) has made an enjoyable creepy psychological thriller that is perhaps not as profound as it dreams of being. (Scott) ★ ‘Ernest & Celestine’ (PG, 1:20, in either French or English) A tale of mice and bears, derring-do and dentistry, this lovely animated movie about would-be foes who become friends originated in a cycle of children’s books by the Belgian writer and artist Gabrielle Vincent. The books have simple stories and enchanting illustrations by Vincent that are characterized by graceful lines, muted colors and blurred edges, which focuses your attention on animals that, in their poignant delicacy, evoke Beatrix Potter. The screen character designs are broader and more overtly comic, but the three directors — Benjamin Renner, Vincent Patar and Stéphane Aubier — have retained enough of Vincent’s charming vision that the movie feels intimate and personal, as if it, too, had sprung from a single hand. (Dargis) ‘Exposed’ (No rating, 1:17) Dancing on the wilder shores of burlesque, from Manhattan clubs to the Coney Island boardwalk, the eight performers profiled in Beth B’s joyfully explicit documentary blend politics, gender and sexuality into candid portraits of the person beneath the exhibition. (Catsoulis) ‘Finding Vivian Maier’ (No rating, 1:23) An exciting electric current of discovery runs through John Maloof and Charlie Siskel’s documentary about the street photographer who worked as a care provider and never exhibited her work. Maier is a terrific story — part Mary Poppins, part Weegee — and the movie is a solid if finally thin introduction to her. It’s also, to state the obvious, a feature-length advertisement for Mr. Maloof’s commercial venture as the principal owner of her work and would have been stronger if it had dug into the complexities of what it means when one person assumes ownership of another’s art. (Dargis) ‘The French Minister (Quai D’Orsay)’ (No rating, 1:53, in French) Fires burn, simmer and die, only to rekindle, in Bertrand Tavernier’s sharp, sly comedy of manners and errors. The movie is based on “Quai d’Orsay,” a graphic novel illustrated by Christophe Blain, whose sharp caricatures and comic-book flourishes Mr. Tavernier has nicely translated to the screen. The book’s writer, Abel Lanzac, is a pseudonym for Antonin Baudry, a diplomat who based it on his experiences working for Dominique de Villepin (a terrific Thierry Lhermitte plays the fictionalized version), the foreign minister during the lead-up to the war in Iraq. (Dargis) ‘From Both Sides of the Aegean’ (No rating, 1:27) This documentary by Maria Iliou revisits the forced ouster of Orthodox Greeks from Turkey and Muslim Turks from Greece in the 1920s. Though the film explores a fascinating subject, the storytelling style is dry, static and even convoluted. (Bale) ★ ‘Frozen’ (PG, 1:40) A beautiful princess with magical powers that she can’t control; an adorable snowman with buck teeth and a carrot for a nose who longs to sunbathe because no one ever told him that heat melts ice; a picture-perfect prince who is not what he appears to be: these are among the unconventional characters in the new Disney 3-D animated movie musical very loosely based on Hans Christian Andersen’s “The Snow Queen.” (Holden) ★ ‘The Grand Budapest Hotel’ (R, 1:39) Wes Anderson’s latest film is whimsical, fussy and ingenious — a Wes Anderson film, in other words — but it is also a sly and touching engagement with some of the ugliest parts of 20th-century European history. Ralph Fiennes plays a hotel concierge in the fictional Central-European republic of Zubrowka in the fateful year of 1932. The frames are beautifully composed, the production design exquisite and a large cast is dispatched on a complex caper. But all the fun is shadowed by — and is a brilliant protest against — some very cruel realities. (Scott) ★ ‘Gravity’ (PG-13, 1:30) Alfonso Cuarón’s gripping, spectacular film about astronauts in peril is less a science-fiction story than a lean and simple tale of the struggle to survive. Sandra Bullock and George Clooney are the space travelers orbiting the Earth, but the real star is Mr. Cuarón’s breathtaking sense of scale and movement. He also grounds his technical bravura in a friendly, low-key humanism, and the result is a movie that is at once cosmic and intimate. (Scott) ★ ‘The Great Beauty’ (No rating, 2:22, in Italian) This deliriously alive movie from the Italian director Paolo Sorrentino tells the story of a man, a city, a country and a cinema, though not necessarily in that order. Set in Rome, it follows Jep (a sybarite played with a veneer of wit and fathomless soul by the great actor Toni Servillo), who dances into the story while celebrating his 65th birthday and slowly, stirringly, wakens to the world around him. A must-see. (Dargis) ★ ‘Her’ (R, 2:05) At once a brilliant conceptual gag and a deeply sincere romance, Spike Jonze’s exquisite new movie is an unlikely yet completely plausible love story set in the near-future about a man (a wonderful Joaquin Phoenix), who sometimes resembles a machine, and an operating system (voiced by Scarlett Johansson), who very much suggests a living woman. From Mr. Phoenix’s wide-open face to the diffused lighting and ravishingly lovely sherbet palette, this is a movie you want to reach out and caress, about a man who, like everyone else around him in this near future, has retreated from other people into a machine world. In “Her,” the great question isn’t whether machines can think, but whether human beings can still feel. (Dargis) ★ ‘Hide Your Smiling Faces’ (No rating, 1:21) Daniel Patrick Carbone’s haunting feature debut, though set in the present, evokes a semi-rural 1950s America in which packs of neighborhood boys pass the time riding their bikes, exploring the woods and engaging in ritualistic roughhouse games. The mood of the film, shot in woodsy areas of Sussex County, N.J., suggests a darker reflection of the same vision of boyhood adventure depicted in Terrence Malick’s “The Tree of Life.” (Holden) ★ ‘It Felt Like Love’ (No rating, 1:22) Photographed with a soft light that makes skin tones sing, Eliza Hittman’s sensual and insightful first feature, set in a working-class Brooklyn neighborhood, observes a coltish 14-year-old (Gina Piersanti) who longs for sexual assurance and romantic connection. (Catsoulis) ‘Jews of Egypt’ (No rating, 1:36, in Arabic and French) This compelling documentary focuses on the turbulent period from 1949 to 1956, when many Egyptian Jews left or were forced out of the country. Despite some filmmaking quirks, like freeze-framing interviewees at emotional moments, the director Amir Ramses shows a talent for storytelling. (Bale) ★ ‘Just a Sigh’ (No rating, 1:44, in French and English) In this contemporary Gallic answer to “Brief Encounter,” Emmanuelle Devos and Gabriel Byrne play a struggling French actress and an older British academic who meet by chance on a train and have a daylong fling. The narrative is episodic but the movie is beautifully acted. (Holden) ‘The Lego Movie’ (PG, 1:40) This movie is an energetic stew of visual wit, action, family-film sentiment and pop-culture japery, with lots of celebrity voices. What distinguishes it from lesser, merchandise-centric animated entertainment is its commitment to the discipline and endless creative potential of Lego itself. The filmmakers conjure a universe made of interlocking plastic blocks in which everything seems possible. (Scott) ★ ‘The Lunchbox’ (PG, 1:44, in Hindi) Ritesh Batra’s charming debut, set in Mumbai, refreshes an old and sturdy conceit (perhaps most familiar from “You’ve Got Mail”). Two lonely souls — a neglected young housewife (Nimrat Kaur) and a middle-aged, widowed office worker (Irrfan Khan) — pursue an anonymous correspondence that begins when a home-cooked lunch is delivered to the wrong place. (Scott) ‘Mr. Peabody & Sherman’ (PG, 1:32) A dog and his boy, traveling through time. This latest bit of big-studio baby boomer pop-culture recycling is genial and witty, though not quite as aggressively brainy as the original Jay Ward animation. The goofy high spirits are marred by the kind of unthinking sexism that, even in the wake of “Brave” and “Frozen,” remains the default setting for feature-length animation. (Scott) ‘Muppets Most Wanted’ (PG, 1:47) In this follow-up to the 2011 Muppet movie, Kermit lands in a gulag while an evil frog who bears a striking resemblance to him takes his place on an international Muppet tour. The charm of the earlier film is replaced with plotting complexities, and the movie has more grown-up jokes than its predecessor. It’s sometimes funny but rarely lovable. (Genzlinger) ‘Need for Speed’ (PG-13, 2:10) This 3-D driving movie, adapted from a popular series of video games, aims for the unpretentious B-picture glory of the “Fast and Furious” franchise at its best. There are some good moments — thanks to Imogen Poots, Michael Keaton and a souped-up Mustang — but the cornball story and witless acting (including from Aaron Paul, the brooding lead) slow down the action and gum up the story. (Scott) ‘Noah’ (PG-13, 2:18) Darren Aronofsky’s version of the familiar Sunday school story is a scary, brooding environmental allegory, in which Noah (Russell Crowe) takes his divine instructions as a warrant for fanatical, almost genocidal behavior. Noah, assisted by stone giants, is pitted against Tubal-Cain (Ray Winstone), who wants to save corrupt humanity from its creator’s wrath. The movie is clumsy and not always coherent, but at its mad best it is a powerful, sincere attempt to find modern meanings in the Old Testament. (Scott) ‘Non-Stop’ (PG-13, 1:46) A satisfying, primitive bluntness distinguishes “Non-Stop,” which turns on an air marshal (Liam Neeson) who, during a super-bad flight, tries to stop an anonymous extortionist from killing a passenger every 20 minutes. The story is as nonsensical as it sounds, but the film’s director, Jaume Collet-Serra, has a sure genre hand and real feeling for what Mr. Neeson brings to the screen at this stage of his career. (Dargis) ‘Nymphomaniac: Volume I’ (No rating, 1:58) The title of Lars von Trier’s latest would-be provocation is preposterous, a huckster gimmick; it may also be a dig at those who, I think wrongly, label him a misogynist because of the abuse he rains down on his female characters. Women suffer in his work, yet they also dominate, shape and haunt it. That’s true of Joe (Charlotte Gainsbourg) who, over the course of this fitfully amusing sometimes explicit demi-movie, relates her sex life to a stranger (Stellan Skarsgard). And then the movie bluntly ends and the credits roll next to some teasing clips from “Volume II” that imply Joe’s sexcapades are about to turn very ugly or deeply silly, both being possible with Mr. von Trier. (Dargis) ‘On My Way’ (No rating, 1:53, in French) This likable, Gallic comedy is a valentine to Catherine Deneuve, who plays a former beauty queen, now in her 60s, who owns a financially failing bistro. When her longtime boyfriend leaves her for another woman, she goes on the road and has a series of mild adventures in the French heartland. (Holden) ★ ‘Particle Fever’ (No rating, 1:39) This documentary, directed by Mark Levinson, chronicles the work of theoretical and experimental physicists involved with the Large Hadron Collider, an enormous gizmo near Geneva that in 2012 isolated the elusive Higgs boson (a subatomic morsel believed to hold the key to understanding the universe). If that sentence is clear to you, you should buy a ticket now, but even if the intricacies of physics lie beyond your grasp, the grandeur of the enterprise and the humanity of the scientists themselves make for mind-blowing viewing. (Scott) ★ ‘Philomena’ (PG-13, 1:38) Judi Dench’s portrayal of a stubborn, kindhearted Irish Catholic trying to discover what became of the son she was forced to give up as a teenager is so quietly moving that it feels lit from within. A major theme of this anticlerical screed is forgiveness. Ms. Dench’s Philomena glows with the radiance of someone serene in her faith despite inhumane treatment by the church. That she makes you believe her character has the capacity to forgive provides the movie with a solid moral center. (Holden) ‘The Raid 2’ (R, 2:28, in Indonesian) The pleasant surprise of Gareth Evans’s sturdy sequel to “The Raid: Redemption” is that neither its undercover drama nor its long running time bog down its bracing, expertly staged fight fests. Iko Uwais returns as Rama, a principled Jakarta cop who infiltrates a crime syndicate by aiding the boss’s son. (Nicolas Rapold) ‘Rob the Mob’ (R, 1:44) Bright and fleet, Raymond De Felitta’s breezy retelling of one of New York City’s more unusual crime sprees follows a pair of crazy-in-love and comically dumb crooks (Michael Pitt and Nina Arianda) as they rob a series of Mafia social clubs. (Catsoulis) ‘Sabotage’ (R, 1:49) Lovers of camp and cannabis are the most plausible audience for this extravagantly silly movie about a gang of marauding Drug Enforcement Administration undercover thugs led by Arnold Schwarzenegger. Filled with howling, yowling characters who look like they’ve made a close study of the FX show “Sons of Anarchy,” the movie has the kind of jagged, jolting visual excesses and frenzied energy that solicit gasps and guffaws. It’s doubtful that the director, David Ayer, who shares script credit with Skip Woods, intentionally embraced self-parody, but it sure sneaked up on him. (Dargis) ‘300: Rise of an Empire’ (R, 1:42) Taking the battle to the sea, this new story about the gory defense of ancient Greece strives to uphold the rah-rah visuals and rhetoric established by its popular predecessor, “300.” A fresh mortal threat to manliness arises in the person of the Persians’ vicious naval commander, Artemisia (Eva Green), but this round of gravity-defying melees and meager intrigue lacks the momentum and bombastic je ne sais quoi of the first film. (Rapold) ‘Tim’s Vermeer’ (PG-13, 1:20) One of the title figures of this documentary directed by Teller and produced by Penn Jillette, is Tim Jenison, a scientist, inventor and restless hobbyist who embarked on a multiyear odyssey to discover whether the movie’s other, better-known, subject, the Dutch master Johannes Vermeer, used any kind of optical tools when he created his extraordinary paintings. Did Vermeer “cheat”? Does it matter? (Dargis) ★ ‘12 Years a Slave’ (R, 2:14) Written by John Ridley and directed by Steve McQueen, “12 Years a Slave” tells the true story of Solomon Northup (Chiwetel Ejiofor), an African-American freeman who, in 1841, was snatched off the streets of Washington, and sold. It’s at once a familiar, utterly strange and deeply American story in which the period trappings long beloved by Hollywood — the paternalistic gentry with their pretty plantations, their genteel manners and all the fiddle-dee-dee rest — are the backdrop for an outrage. Essential viewing. (Dargis) ‘Tyler Perry’s Single Moms Club’ (PG-13, 1:51) A movie-length act of affirmation, Tyler Perry’s latest film touches on some recognizable and realistic challenges with efficient compassion, but there’s probably more dramatic tension in a car pool than in the film’s collection of predicaments. (Rapold) ★ ‘The Unknown Known’ (PG-13, 1:42) Errol Morris and Donald H. Rumsfeld face off (though only one is seen on camera) in this combative, intellectually thrilling documentary about truth, power and the Iraq War. It’s a disturbing inquiry into recent American political history that plays out as a philosophical skirmish. (Scott) ‘Veronica Mars’ (PG-13, 1:47) For three well-received seasons, Kristen Bell played the title character in “Veronica Mars,” a high-school (then college) sleuth from the fictional, filthy rich town of Neptune. Veronica looked like a SoCal cheerleader and alternately talked like Sam Spade and Noam Chomsky, a combination that made her television’s very own Little Miss Sunshine and Noir. She’s back in this unnecessary footnote to the show, which was canceled in 2007. The showrunner turned movie director Rob Thomas suggests that even after graduating from law school, Veronica yearns for Neptune and its sordid intrigues, but he can’t make the case or his story convincing. (Dargis) ★ ‘Le Week-End’ (R, 1:33) Nick (Jim Broadbent) and Meg (Lindsay Duncan), a left-leaning, academic British baby boomer couple, arrive in Paris to celebrate their 30th anniversary. But are we witnessing the celebration of a long marriage or its sudden unraveling? The writer Hanif Kureishi and the director Roger Michell (whose previous collaborations include “The Mother” and “The Buddha of Suburbia”) confect what is on the surface a bittersweet comedy of love in maturity. But there are strong, angry passions under the surface (particularly as far as Meg is concerned) and an eruption of sharp social satire when Jeff Goldblum shows up playing an old graduate school chum of Nick’s who has matured into a happy and prosperous sell out. (Scott) ‘The Wind Rises’ (No rating, 2:06, in Japanese) Hayao Miyazaki’s newest (and reportedly final) film tells the fictionalized story of Jiro Horikoshi, a gifted aeronautic engineer who is historically notable — or infamous — for designing deadly war planes used by Japan in World War II. Mr. Miyazaki’s elegantly lyrical film chronicles Horikoshi’s process of invention and his poignant romance with his tubercular wife, shadowed by dreamlike premonitions and creative visions. (Rapold) Film Series The Aesthetics of Shadow, Part 2: Europe and America (through April 17) This cinematic exploration of Daisuke Miyao’s book of the same title, which takes Jun’ichiro Tanizaki’s theory on “the magic of shadows” in Japanese architecture and adapts it to film theory, first looked at how Japanese filmmakers absorbed this aesthetic. As Part 2 makes clear, the influence arrived in the West in the form of brooding, visually austere films that are frequently — and perhaps reductively — described as “noir” or “Expressionist.” Masters of mood like F.W. Murnau and Josef von Sternberg are represented, and the series wisely includes visually innovative cinematographers like Billy Bitzer, known for his discomfitingly visceral work on D.W. Griffith’s “Broken Blossoms,” and William Daniels, who played as central a role as anyone in turning Greta Garbo into a screen legend. Museum of Modern Art, 212-708-9400, moma.org; $12. (Eric Grode) Blonde Venus: The Films of Dietrich and von Sternberg (Friday through next Friday) Has any other director-performer pairing captured an era, an ethos or a personality as indelibly as that of Josef von Sternberg and Marlene Dietrich’s? They collaborated on seven films in six years, and all eight will be shown by BAMcinématek. Yes, all eight: On Sunday their 1930 masterpiece, “The Blue Angel,” will be screened in the usual German-language version (at 4 and 6:30 p.m.) as well as the long-lost English version (at 8:45 p.m.). That movie was the first one to cross the desk of the Hays Code enforcers, and subsequent films like “Blonde Venus” (on Wednesday at 4:30, 7 and 9:45 p.m.) and the Catherine the Great biopic “The Scarlet Empress” (on Thursday at 4:30, 7 and 9:30 p.m.) fell in a curious grace period before the enforcers began cracking down. BAM Rose Cinemas, 30 Lafayette Avenue, at Ashland Place, Fort Greene, Brooklyn, 718-636-4100, bam.org; $13. (Grode) Panorama Europe (Friday through April 13) This annual festival of underrecognized European films was called Disappearing Act for its first five years, but now the Museum of the Moving Image and a collection of European cultural institutions have adopted this more optimistic name. A few titles are familiar to New York moviegoers: “Paradise: Love,” the first of Ulrich Seidl’s gimlet-eyed “Paradise” trilogy, will be shown on Saturday at 7 p.m., and the series opener, the Spanish police thriller “Unit 7” (on Friday at 7 p.m.), appeared at last year’s Tribeca Film Festival. Among the other titles are several Eastern European offerings, including “Dream Team 1935” (on Sunday at noon), about a Latvian basketball team, and “Blood Type” (on April 13 at noon), a documentary about Estonian soldiers fighting in Afghanistan. A handful of screenings, from Tuesday through Thursday, will be held at Bohemian National Hall in Manhattan. Museum of the Moving Image, 35th Avenue at 37th Street, Astoria, Queens, 718-784-0077, movingimage.us; $12. (Grode) Permanent Vacation: The Films of Jim Jarmusch (Wednesday through April 10) Another week, another comprehensive blitz through a director’s work in anticipation of his latest release. On the heels of Museum of the Moving Image’s Darren Aronofsky series, Film Society of Lincoln Center is presenting 11 films by Mr. Jarmusch, the personification of indie-’80s cool. “Stranger Than Paradise” knocked ’em dead at the first Sundance Film Festival, and “Down by Law” (various dates, including a screening on Wednesday that Mr. Jarmusch will attend) introduced the indelible screen pairing of Tom Waits and Roberto Benigni. Next Friday, Mr. Jarmusch’s latest effort, the vampire romance “Only Lovers Left Alive,” will be released. Elinor Bunin Munroe Film Center, Lincoln Center, 144 West 65th Street, 212-875-5601, filmlinc.com; $13. (Grode) Tout Truffaut (through April 17) Film Forum’s tribute to one of the cinema’s greatest auteur bromances continues. Fresh off its Hitchcock retrospective, Film Forum shifts its attention to his admirer and interviewer, François Truffaut. (The more than 26 hours of interviews resulted in the irresistible 1967 book “Hitchcock/Truffaut.”) This series is another bonanza for completists: Nestled alongside classics like “The 400 Blows” and “Jules and Jim” are such lesser-known 1970s titles as his Henry James adaptation, “The Green Room” (on Tuesday), and the director’s cut of his Belle Époque love triangle, “Two English Girls” (next Friday). 209 West Houston Street, west of Avenue of the Americas, South Village, 212-727-8110, filmforum.org; $13. (Grode) WSB100: William S. Burroughs on Film (through Sunday) The Beats just go on and on, with Anthology Film Archives joining the Issue Project Room, the Stone and other downtown venues this month to honor what would have been William S. Burroughs’s 100th birthday. (It was actually in February, but Burroughs, the author of “Junky” presumably wouldn’t object to a bit of sluggishness.) Cineastes will probably gravitate toward “Haxan: Witchcraft Through the Ages” (on Friday at 7:30 p.m. and Sunday at 8:30 p.m.), in which Anthony Balch re-edited and condensed the 1922 silent grotesquerie. This version has new narration by Burroughs. Literary types, meanwhile, might opt for “Nova Express” (Saturday at 8 p.m.), Andre Perkowski’s three-hour found-footage adaptation of Burroughs’s 1964 novel of the same name. Anthology Film Archives, 32-34 Second Avenue, at Second Street, East Village, 212-505-5181, anthologyfilmarchives.org; $10. (Grode) A version of this article appears in print on , on Page C 17 of the New York edition with the headline: The Listings: Movies . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              