   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Sports Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Soccer Star Kylian Mbappe’s Move to Paris St.-Germain Is Completed Image Kylian Mbappe playing for France in a Group A qualifying match Thursday against the Netherlands. Credit Christophe Ena/Associated Press Aug. 31, 2017 Forward Kylian Mbappe’s expected move to Paris St.-Germain finally went through Thursday evening, as Monaco loaned him until the end of the season along with an option to make the move permanent. No financial details were given by P.S.G. in its statement, but the permanent deal would be from 2018 to 2022. Although no transfer fee has been given by either French club, it was widely reported that P.S.G. will pay an astonishing 180 million euros ($216 million) for Mbappe, an 18-year-old who burst onto the scene last season. “It’s with great joy and pride that I’m joining Paris St.-Germain,” Mbappe said in a statement. “For all young people who grew up in the Paris region, it’s often a dream to be able to wear the red and blue shirt.” It means that P.S.G. now has unprecedented status as effectively owning the world’s two most expensive players, with the Brazilian star Neymar bought for a world-record 222 million euros ($262 million). BARKLEY REJECTS A MOVE TO CHELSEA Ross Barkley became the latest player to reject a move to Premier League champion Chelsea, pulling out of a deal at the end of a summer transfer window in which English clubs spent more than 1.3 billion pounds ($1.7 billion). Chelsea did manage to sign midfielder Danny Drinkwater from 2016 champion Leicester for a reported 35 million pounds ($45 million) and defender Davide Zappacosta from the Italian club Torino. Barkley’s rejection stunned Chelsea after midfielder Alex Oxlade-Chamberlain opted to leave Arsenal for Liverpool and forward Fernando Llorente favored a move to Tottenham from Swansea. FRANCE WINS IN CUP QUALIFYING France regained control of its World Cup destiny with a comfortable 4-0 win against the Netherlands in Group A, damaging Dutch hopes of qualification and moving Les Bleus 3 points ahead of Sweden after it lost, 3-2, at Bulgaria. Antoine Griezmann’s 17th international goal set France on its way in the first half, and Monaco attacking midfielder Thomas Lemar’s first two international goals after the break secured victory against a shoddy Dutch side short on invention and lacking in composure. Kylian Mbappe came off the bench to score the fourth in a breathtaking cameo. IN OTHER EUROPEAN QUALIFYING Cristiano Ronaldo scored a hat trick to move past Pelé on the career list of international goal scorers as Portugal beat Faeroe Islands, 5-1, to stay close to Switzerland, a 3-0 winner over Andorra, at the top of Group B. With a showtime performance orchestrated by P.S.G.’s Thomas Meunier against part-timers from Gibraltar, star-studded Belgium produced a 9-0 victory in Brussels in Group H. Meunier had three goals and three assists, and Romelu Lukaku added three goals. IN SOUTH AMERICA QUALIFYING In a show of solidarity, Uruguay’s Luis Suárez modeled a uniform with No. 20 on the front, and Argentina’s Lionel Messi stood alongside him wearing No. 30. The gesture by the Barcelona teammates came on the same day that the two nations — and possibly Paraguay and Chile, too — announced a proposal to bid jointly for the 2030 World Cup. The World Cup qualifier that followed barely matched the pregame excitement. The bitter rivals drew, 0-0, in Montevideo, a result that did little for either team. Brazil has already advanced, but the other three automatic berths are wide open. PRO FOOTBALL Giants Top Patriots as Time Expires Aldrick Rosas hit a 48-yard field goal as time expired, giving the Giants a 40-38 victory over the New England Patriots in the final exhibition game for both teams in Foxborough, Mass. The Giants scored 34 points in the first half, but the Patriots outscored them by 24-3 over the final 29 minutes before Rosas’ field goal. It helped salvage a night in which Geno Smith and Josh Johnson each had touchdown passes, and the Giants’ defense returned an interception for a touchdown. The third-stringer Jacoby Brissett threw for 341 yards and four touchdowns, and ran for another to nearly lead the Super Bowl champions back from a 20-point halftime deficit. Stephen Gostkowski hit a 55-yard go-ahead field goal with 44 seconds remaining. MCCOWN STARTS AND JETS WIN Josh McCown and the Jets’ first-team offense got the start — and a big scare — in the preseason finale as the Jets held on to beat the Philadelphia Eagles, 16-10. McCown took a shot to his chest from Eagles linebacker Joe Walker after completing a 20-yard pass to Austin Seferian-Jenkins with 7 minutes 13 seconds left in the opening quarter. He was down on a knee for a few moments before jogging off the field and then going down to a knee again as trainers attended to him. He missed one play. COLLEGE FOOTBALL Rudolph Leads No. 10 Oklahoma State Mason Rudolph threw for 303 yards and three touchdowns and ran for another score to help No. 10 Oklahoma State beat Tulsa, 59-24, in Stillwater, Okla. BASEBALL Morales’s 3 Homers End Orioles’ Streak The Baltimore Orioles’ seven-game winning streak ended under a barrage of home runs by Kendrys Morales, who went deep three times and had a career-high seven R.B.I. to provide the visiting Toronto Blue Jays with an 11-8 victory. DIAMONDBACKS SWEEP DODGERS Zack Greinke his 16th victory with six strong innings as the host Arizona Diamondbacks beat Los Angeles, 8-1, to complete the first series sweep of the Dodgers this season. IN OTHER GAMES Zach Davies won his 16th game to tie Greinke for the most victories in the majors, Jonathan Villar homered and the Brewers beat the Washington Nationals, 6-3, in Milwaukee. Max Kepler was hit by a pitch with the bases loaded and two outs in the bottom of the ninth inning, and the Minnesota Twins rallied to beat the Chicago White Sox, 5-4, for their fourth straight win. Jose Altuve homered, the Houston bullpen pitched four and a third scoreless innings and the Astros beat the Texas Rangers, 5-1, in St. Petersburg, Fla., in the last game before they return to their flood-ravaged home city. PRO BASKETBALL Randolph Faces Misdemeanor Drug Charge Sacramento Kings forward Zach Randolph has been charged with misdemeanor marijuana possession and resisting arrest following an incident this month when a large gathering became unruly at a Los Angeles housing project, prosecutors said. Randolph, a two-time N.B.A. All-Star, had initially been arrested on suspicion of possessing marijuana with intent to sell — a felony — but Los Angeles city prosecutors instead charged Randolph with misdemeanor drug possession. GOLF South Korean Leads After a 66 In Gee Chun of South Korea shot a six-under 66 in the Cambia Portland Classic in Portland, Ore., to take a one-stroke lead over the two-time defending champion Brooke Henderson and five others. CYCLING Froome Crashes Twice as Lead Is Cut Chris Froome crashed twice as rivals reduced his Vuelta a España lead in Stage 12, which was won by the Lotto-Soudal rider Tomasz Marczynski. Vincenzo Nibali cut 20 seconds off Froome’s advantage and now trails by 59 seconds in second place. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page B 11 of the New York edition with the headline: Soccer; Young Star’s Move to Paris St.-Germain Is Done . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              