   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index New York Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Smack in the Middle of the Track: An Errant Basketball Image For three weeks, a basketball hid in plain sight on an uptown train track at West 18th Street in Manhattan, evading subway cars, sweepers and even commuters. Credit Hiroko Masuike/The New York Times By  Jacob Bernstein March 28, 2017 Earlier this month, a curious visitor took up residence right in the middle of the uptown track of the 1 line at West 18th Street in Manhattan. Hardy as a cockroach and oranger than an orangutan was one dust-covered basketball, which first made its appearance on the southern end of the station sometime around March 1 and sat in the center of the track, barely moving at all, until track workers apparently extracted it some three weeks later. If one considers that a subway arrived and departed 229 times a day during the week and 140 to 150 times a day over the weekend, this means that the ball managed to narrowly escape being run over roughly 4,300 times during the course of its subterranean sojourn. Few survivalists can claim this track record. Almost as remarkable was how most riders seemed not to notice it. Perhaps this was because of the ball’s location, away from the entranceway. But its ability to hide in plain sight also spoke to the single-mindedness of New York subway riders. The ball went unobserved by Arielle Calderon, who works in the video department at BuzzFeed, whose offices are in the neighborhood. “I can’t believe there’s a basketball and I never noticed it,” she said Monday evening, while waiting for the subway. “It’s like the only concern about the track is that I don’t get pushed onto it.” It also went unobserved by David Kim. “I guess I’m always on my phone,” he said. So they had their excuses. But what of those trusty blue track sweeper trains that barrel through regularly? How had they managed to miss it? “These cleaning cars that go through at night pick trash and debris like wrappers and boxes that people throw on the track. They don’t get large basketballs,” said Mitchell L. Moss , the Henry Hart Rice professor of urban planning at New York University and the director of the Rudin Center for Transportation Policy and Management . Nor, he said, were their vacuum-like, sucking ergonomics designed for any other number of curiously placed objects, which over the years have included fur coats, television sets, boomboxes, iPhones, Blackberries and shopping carts. In 2013, service on the B and Q lines was suspended for upward of two hours when a couple of recalcitrant kittens scampered onto the track at the Church Avenue subway station in Brooklyn . This became a campaign issue in the mayoral race as candidates such as Christine Quinn and Anthony Weiner tried to appease animal-rights activists without infuriating impatient New Yorkers. In 2014, a transit worker named Bob Devine recovered a bag of clothes hurled beside a third rail in the Bronx, the apparent result of a lovers’ quarrel . “We’re O.K. now,” the man reportedly told Mr. Devine as he repacked his jeans. So it seems clear that a lone unattended basketball is not the biggest crisis the Metropolitan Transportation Authority has faced in recent years. But coming amid increasing complaints about the organization, riders predictably relished the opportunity to gripe. Les James, a personal trainer at Completebody Gym on West 19th Street in Manhattan, kvetched inside the station about how long it was taking to get it removed. “And yet they still raised the prices,” he said, mere hours after his monthly MetroCard went from $116.50 to $121. “In all seriousness, I do think this can serve as more of a metaphor for the overall decline in subway service, perhaps more than a malfunction in track-cleaning technology,” said Jaqi Cohen, the campaign coordinator at the Straphangers Campaign “Trash/debris on subway tracks, besides being an eyesore, can cause a serious problem as it can lead to track fires and, subsequently, train delays. The frequency of subway delays has increased in recent years, yet the M.T.A.’s explanation for these delays has been pretty vague.” Beth DeFalco, an M.T.A. spokeswoman, did not exactly deny the second part of this statement. “Every time I see someone throw a coffee cup onto the track in the morning, all I think about is the potential delay,” she said last week. So why didn’t Ms. DeFalco get someone on the phone to explain why it had taken a full three weeks to remove? Why did she kick the ball — as it were — down the court? “I’m just not sure I can promise that today,” she said of the information. “We’ll try to track it down — no pun intended — but there are 660 track miles in the system to check.” A version of this article appears in print on , on Page A 28 of the New York edition with the headline: Hiding in Plain Sight: An Errant Ball’s 3-Week Stop . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Related Coverage M.T.A. Votes to Raise Fares and Tolls: What You Need to Know Jan. 25, 2017 Image Coming to the Rescue for Riders Who Drop Treasures on the Tracks Sept. 14, 2014 Image 9 Lives? M.T.A. Takes No Chances With Cats on Tracks Aug. 29, 2013 Image Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              