   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Corrections Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Corrections: March 9, 2015 March 9, 2015 FRONT PAGE An article on Feb. 26 about basket studies, which group cancer patients in a new way, referred incorrectly to the treatment Erika Hurwitz underwent for a rare cancer of white blood cells. Before trying a melanoma drug that made her cancer undetectable, she had been treated unsuccessfully with chemotherapy, not with radiation. • An article on Monday about the lack of uniform numbers available to Yankees players because the team has retired so many misstated the number of uniform numbers the St. Louis Cardinals have retired. It is 12, not 13. NATIONAL An article on Friday about Jeb Bush’s struggle to win over Republicans in Iowa misspelled the name of a county in the state. It is Greene County, not Green. NEW YORK An article on Friday about a jet that skidded off a runway at La Guardia Airport on Thursday morning and crashed through a fence, stopping just moments before it would have plunged into Flushing Bay, misstated the number of people killed in a jetliner crash at the airport in 1992. It was 27, not 19. • An article on Feb. 23 about an animal-rights activist accused of stealing two ducks from a foie gras supplier in Ferndale, N.Y., misstated, in some editions, the name of the organization that posted video clips from her foray. It is the Animal Protection and Rescue League, not the Animal Rights and Protection League. BUSINESS DAY A picture on Friday with a report in the DealTalks Online listing about the sale of the Long Island estate of Peter B. Madoff, which was confiscated by the federal government after Mr. Madoff pleaded guilty to crimes related to the Ponzi scheme of his brother, Bernard L. Madoff, was published in error. The photograph showed Shawn Elliott, a real estate broker, not Peter Madoff. • An article last Monday about Chinese technology companies’ efforts to monitor food safety misspelled the given name of a shopper who was testing a smartphone tracking feature. She is Xu Guilin, not Guillin. • An article on Wednesday about the growth of solar energy production in Japan misspelled the name of an island near Nagasaki on which a real estate developer hopes to build a solar power plant. It is Ukujima, not Ukushima. SPORTS A headline on Jan. 31 with an article about Chris Lewis, a top high school basketball player, overstated his connection to Harvard. While Lewis, a junior, has verbally committed to play for Harvard beginning in 2016, he has not applied or been accepted to the university and, thus, is not yet “Harvard-bound.” • A picture caption in some editions on Friday with an article about the women’s basketball team at Florida Gulf Coast University misspelled the given name of guard Kaneisha Atwater’s son. He is Andarious Fulton, not Aendrious. • The Sports Business column on Wednesday about contract negotiations between Major League Soccer and its players union misstated, in some copies, the date of one of the N.B.A.’s two recent lockout-shortened seasons. It was the 2011-12 season, not 2010-11. THE ARTS An article on Thursday about the World Press Photo contest misstated the number of times the photographer Gary Knight has been chairman of the contest jury. He has headed it two times, not four. The article also misidentified the subject of a photograph taken by Giovanni Troilo at the studio of the artist Vadim Vosters outside Brussels. The photograph depicts a naked male model stretched out on a table; it does not depict Mr. Vosters. The Times welcomes comments and suggestions, or complaints about errors that warrant correction. Messages on news coverage can be e-mailed to nytnews@nytimes.com or left toll-free at 1-888-NYT-NEWS (1-888-698-6397). Comments on editorials may be e-mailed to letters@nytimes.com or faxed to (212) 556-3622. Readers dissatisfied with a response or concerned about the paper’s journalistic integrity may reach the public editor at public@nytimes.com or (212) 556-7652. For newspaper delivery questions: 1-800-NYTIMES (1-800-698-4637) or e-mail customercare@nytimes.com . A version of this article appears in print on , on Page A 2 of the National edition with the headline: Corrections . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              