   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index The Learning Network Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Current Events Conversation Unlikely Friendships, Toy Nostalgia and a Supreme Court Case: Our Favorite Student Comments of the Week Image People gathered to support Jack Phillips, the Colorado baker, outside the Supreme Court in Washington on Dec. 5. Related Article Credit Zach Gibson for The New York Times By  The Learning Network Dec. 14, 2017 All fall we’ve been honoring our favorite student comments on our writing prompts via this weekly forum, and we will be doing that again starting Jan. 4. This, however, is our final roundup for 2017, and we dedicate it to the many teachers  who have brought their classes to participate regularly. We’ve loved seeing the same names and locations over and over, and we’d be interested to hear about how you teach with our prompts. Please post a comment or write to LNFeedback@nytimes.com and let us know. And speaking of names we’ve seen many times in the past, we’re especially appreciative of students Polaris Hall from Danvers, Mass., and Thomas Higgins from Wilmington, N.C., for their many contributions this week. Though we won’t be posting new prompts from Dec. 23 to Jan. 1, we’re leaving you with this special collection that’s full of seasonal writing inspiration. Happy holidays! Please note: All student comments have been lightly edited for length, but otherwise appear just as they were originally submitted. _________ Image Jack Phillips, the owner of Masterpiece Cakeshop in Lakewood, Colo., says that he should not be forced to use his talents to convey a message of support for same-sex marriage. Credit Nick Cote for The New York Times Our most popular writing prompt this week was “ Should Free Speech Protections Include Self Expression That Discriminates? ” Strong opinions came in on both sides of the issue, especially from students in Kent, Ohio; Sacco, Me.; and Locust Grove, Ga. Jessica Lee from Wilmington, Del., had a two-part answer, and we’ve published excerpts from both: The entire situation ridiculous. First, it is both immoral and against the law to discriminate against any group of people, whether it be race, age, gender or sexuality. As demonstrated in the Supreme Court case Heart of Atlanta Motel, Inc. v. United States, a business is not allowed to discriminate or segregate groups of people. This is the same thing happening again, except this time it is gay people who are being discriminated against. The Supreme Court should uphold the Civil Rights Act declared so long ago, as it has a great impact today. Second, what’s to stop people from discriminating against other groups? If Mr. Phillips ends up winning the case, there is no hope for reaching equality, whatsoever. One could use the case as a reason to discriminate against, perhaps, African Americans, Latinos, or Muslim people. There will be even less tolerance for gay marriage in our country. Also, Mr. Phillips claims he is a Christian, but will not serve others before himself. In refusing to serve same-sex couples, he is violating Christ’s rule to treat others as you would be treated...Christianity is about treating people with respect and supporting a relationship with God, not imposing your opinions on the world around you. In my opinion, the First Amendment is not reliable justification for discrimination against same-sex couples. The First Amendment guarantees free speech. Mr. Philips can express his opinion in ways other than disservice. He can talk about it all he wants, but he should, morally, have to serve gay couples. Artists should be able to create whatever form of art they want, however they should be required to sell such creations to all customers. Art should be considered speech, because one can express oneself through various forms of art, however, actions relating to discrimination should not be considered speech. Actions that are discriminatory towards others can be expressed in ways that are not nearly as hostile. Sophia from Maryland uses her religious teaching to inform her opinion: I have very strong opinions about this issue. First, Phillips is operating a commercial business, so the refusal of service to a customer because of something that he can’t change is in itself discrimination. It doesn’t matter if he call himself an “artist,” he has a shop and is selling cakes to the public, and that is a retail business. Second, Americans have the freedom of religion under the first amendment, which in turn protects the gay couples from Phillips’ beliefs that their union is sin. It’s not just freedom to practice whichever religion you want, it’s freedom from having religion imposed upon you. I’m sure at some point in his life this man has taken advantage of something created by someone who identifies as homosexual, yet he hasn’t gone out of his way to make sure everything he buys or listens to or sees on TV isn’t related to those who identify as gay. I think he knew that he would make a big splash by refusing this couple their cake, so he in this instant decided to “exercise his religious beliefs,” and maybe try to send a message. What I really can’t deal with is people trying to justify being close-minded by citing their religion. Going back into the history of this man’s christian religion, Jesus Christ was open and accepting of all people, like the tax collectors and the lepers. If Phillips was truly following his religion, he would treat people the way that Jesus did, with kindness and acceptance regardless of how society saw them. Robert Berrian from Locust Grove supports the baker: I believe freedom of speech includes expression. So the baker has the power to withhold his artistic talents from the people he wants. It’s his own individually owned business so he can do whatever he pleases. Oriah DeSimone from Thornton Academy comes down in the middle: Free speech and freedom of religion are at play in this court case. My personal opinion is if you have a public business, you should be required to serve anyone that comes to your business, regardless of what you believe. If the business is private, this is a different story. _________ Image Our Picture Prompt “ Wonders of the World"  inspired many to dream. Isha Vashee from Germantown, Md., has a life goal: My dream has been to visit all of the “Seven Wonders of the World” before I die. So far, I have been to visit the Taj Mahal, the Colosseum, and Chichén Itzá. When I traveled to these places, I could see everything in a whole new direction. At the Colosseum, I felt a connection to the ancient Romans and was able to imagine what their life was like all because of a building. At the Taj Mahal, I was able to discover India and connect better with my own culture. At Chichén Itzá, I was able to understand the history of the Mayan culture. My next stop would definitely Machu Picchu. I would love to learn more about the Incas and experience their way of life. Machu Picchu would be an amazing experience and the landscape looks so beautiful and serene. I can’t even begin to imagine how it felt like to be living there so long ago. Ishan Patel from Wilmington, N.C., suggests another special spot: I truly think the Eiffel tower represents remarkable architecture for the time it was built, So therefore I think it should be one of the wonders of the world. Not only does the Eiffel tower looks beautiful but it also has a restaurant in the tower where tourists can sit and eat while having an excellent view of the city. The experience that one can have at Eiffel tower can not be had anywhere in world so for me this would be the place that I would distinguish as a wonder of the world. Brooke Myers from King of Prussia would include a lost city: I have not been to any of the “new Seven Wonder of the World”. I would one day like to visit them all just for the experience but if I got to choose other “Wonders of The World”, I would choose the lost city of Pompeii, the statue of Liberty, and other historical sites. These sites have historical meaning that could be fun to visit and help a person learn about our history. _________ Image A man with the words “do not resuscitate” tattooed on his chest (shown here with the accompanying signature obscured) died this year at a hospital in Miami. The tattoo ultimately “produced more confusion than clarity,” doctors said. Credit The New England Journal of Medicine For our prompt, " Do Not Resuscitate ,” many commenters expressed alarm at doctors allowing a man with a “Do Not Resuscitate” tattoo to die, despite his illness and his signature under the tattoo. Others said the tattoo was a clear message, and should be respected. Madison Pesce from Danvers, Mass., says the body is not a legal document: Not everyday is there a man that gets admitted into the hospital unconscious with the words “Do not resuscitate” and his signature beneath tattooed on his body. Even though the tattoo says one thing, I think the doctors should have resuscitated. To me, this seems like a man who was not in the right state of mind when he made a decision to tattoo a very prominent statement on his body. I think doctors should have resuscitated him because first of all, his body is not a legal place to sign a DNR form and there is a process when doing so and second of all there is no way he could of signed his own body. So my question is, how is it legal for doctors not to resuscitate? Annie C from Ann Arbor, Mich., sees the emotional and the legal sides: Life is something some people live to make the most of. At some point, people decide that they have made the most of their life. If they were to come close with death, they would rather just go peacefully rather than being awakened to hospital sounds and the beeps of the heart rate monitors. When your quality of life is at a low point, you may not want to be awoken once you fall into a sleep. It can be hard for family to watch you live a life that has almost nothing in it that makes it worthwhile. While legally, the doctors maybe shouldn’t have done that, if the man has chosen to get a tattoo that specifically asks for no resuscitation, it’s obviously what he wanted. Sammy Blue from West Michigan, USA, thinks the situation is clear-cut: The man was clearly ready to die, to leave his body behind, to go to heaven, to walk through the western door, to cease to exist - whatever his belief system entailed, he was ready for it. His wishes should have been respected right from the start. Sonja Schutz from San Antonio agrees: Respect the tattoo. Seeing this makes me want to do the same thing: get a tattoo that clearly expresses my health directive. And, from an intensive care unit physician, Andrew Lei, respect for the tattoo: I am an ICU physician. I cant imagine why an ethics consult is required when the man signed a do not resuscitate order on his own chest in perpetuity. Are we so lame as to require a consult to interpret 3 words, written in bold font, underlined, and signed? If this can’t be interpreted we should give up trying to read EKGs and chest x-rays! _________ Image Credit Abbey Lossing After reading about why trying new things is so hard, readers told us about their habits and the challenges they faced in trying to change them . Hailey Pevear from Danvers, Mass., was inspired by the article to switch up her routines: As a person of mindless impulse, it’s easy to pick up habits that stick despite their hinderance on my day to day life. At times it’s nail biting, or waiting too long to turn off my bedroom light before bed. Other times it’s twirling my hair until it falls frizzy and dry. We all have habits, and exercise them daily even if we don’t realize; unless we sit back and acknowledge our own impulses. This article forced me to think about my good habits and bad habits and the impact of each, my mindless laundry folding habit and how it coexists alongside my habitual inability to wear the same shirt twice in a row. My lazy working habits and nail biting and how they contradict my incessant need to buy the most expensive nail polish. Habits are routine, and help us to be ourselves and keep us sane. Yet, this article made me reconsider the threat habits and routine are to creative and adventurous expansion. If we are so insistent on taking the same route to work or school each day, we distance ourselves from new things and new opportunities. If we refuse to wear the same shirt twice, we risk overspending. When habits become our routine, we risk closing ourselves off to all the new things that life has to offer to us. Like so many other commenters, Mohammed 4d from YC - CLIP was frustrated by his habit of procrastination and his difficulty in trying to change it: Every single individual has some kind of habit; it could be bad or good. I have a bad habit that I have tried to change it always, which is I do my work very last minute and then stressing about getting it done on time. Every time I start my work I realize that I should have started it earlier, but when I get the next project I do the same thing again. Many times I have tried to change my habit by trying to start my project on time so I could have done it before the deadline, however I always get distracted by family, friends or my phone. This is very detrimental to my learning style; it makes me very frustrated because when I try to complete everything in a very short amount of time, I mess up my work. So it keeps me up very late at night and I go to college tired the next day. Therefore, I’m getting better at starting my project early day by day. Furthermore, each person has their different life style, which they view good ways or bad, but in life at some point, they change it to the right way. It’s really hard to change something that you have been doing for a long time but if we try hard we can change it. Polaris Hall from Danvers, Mass., reflected on the habits she may change, and those she won’t: When I get Thai food, I get Pad See Ew with tofu. Every time. Why? Because I know I like it. When I enter a cafe and have my choice of singing, I sit facing the door. It makes me feel safer and helps me keep an eye on people coming and going. But still, I try to change things up. Whether it’s trying some of my friend’s food, or sitting at the bar facing the back, or going to a new roller rink, I like to change things up so long as I’m pretty confident I won’t suffer from it. Some things, like the route I walk to work, have proven to be faster or more efficient than anything else, so I don’t change them. Others, like the order I close up work at night, are certainly not the most efficient. Sometimes I try to change them, but other times, I simply like the comfort of doing something I know and know well. Afrin 4d from YC CLIP considered how habits can be both productive and counterproductive: This article reminds me of my own bad habits, mostly being lazy has caused me a lot of problems in my life. Not only caused in my studies but it also in my grades. I have wanted to change this bad habit for the long time, because it affects my physical and emotional well-being. I have trying to fix this bad habit and most of time I am able to get all of my homework done before using my phone and still go to bed at in earlier time. For instance, getting my homework and studying done before watching tv also improved my test scores and the information is able to stick in my head since I am not as lazy as I typically would be. But, Tj Salvo from Danvers, Mass., saw no point in trying to change the routines to which he’s become accustomed: One habit that I realized I do but I haven’t realized was a habit is driving the same exact way from my house to school and then school to my house. As well as the same route from my house to practice, and practice to home. I’ve thought about different routes and different ways other people take to get to that same destination. I haven’t tried to go a different way yet, nor do I really want to. There’s most likely other ways that could get me to where I’m going faster and I wouldn’t have to use so much gas. But I’m so familiar with these ways that changing them would be weird and even thought hey might save me some time and money, I don’t think i’ll ever change my ways. It’s a habit I don’t think I can break. _________ Image The cover of Time’s Person of the Year issue. Credit Time Commenters weighed in with their opinions of Time’s annual “ Person of the Year ” issue. Some were impressed by Time’s choice of the “silence breakers,” but dismayed that several of the year’s most important figures were left out. Jill Nagle from El Cerrito, Calif., wondered: Why wasn’t Tarana Burke, founder of the #metoo movement included in this picture? Colleen Moran from Reading, Mass., added: If you are going to have Taylor you gotta have Kesha. She was a huge presence in this arena. Others weighed in with their own choices. Thomas Higgins from Wilmington, N.C., recommended the year’s most talked-about person: I greatly respect all that these women have gone through and the pain they’ve endured after coming out and in many cases being branded liar and such. I do however disagree with them being person of the year, I think President Trump should have been person of the year. Person of the year isn’t always a good thing for instance Hitler was person of the year, instead it is who influenced world events most. President Trump managed to destabilize the Middle East in the matter of a few words, get in a war of words with an unstable dictator with nuclear weapons, get out of the Paris Climate accords, and that’s just the tip of the iceberg. He is an irrational man, who definitely deserved to be person of the year for all of his horrible decisions. And Nuclear family from Texas suggested these heroes: The person of the year should be all the firemen in California. _________ Image Spencer Sleyon meeting his online friend Rosalind Guttman in Florida last weekend. Credit Rev. Amy Butler Students seemed to be just as touched as we were by a story about an unlikely friendship forming over a game of Words With Friends. Brooke Britton from Stow, Ohio, wrote: I absolutely love this story. It is so heartwarming. The fact that these two met through social media is crazy. It shows that unlikely friendships happen in unlikely places. A twenty-two year old and a eighty-one year old are so unlikely but so perfect. She gives the younger man advice on how to live life and I love that. I bet their story has convinced many people around the world in a similar situation or relationship to take a chance to meet someone that has become such a good friend to them. You can learn so much from being friends with someone different then you...You can learn how to accept someone who is different than you... you can learn that you do not have pressure to act or be like your friends. It is okay to be different. Kate Silver from Wilmington, N.C., shared her own story of an unexpected friendship: My friend Helen and I like to sit on her porch, debate politics, and drink Frescas. She loves to praise Trump and his “Great Wall” while I talk about the dangers of climate change and non-renewable resources. Her dog, Baxter, likes to rub up against my arm, begging for attention, while we rock back and forth in wooden rocking chairs. Most people don’t see us as friends, but who can blame them? She’s a 73 year old retired military nurse and I’m a 16 year old high school student. It’s quite the unexpected duo. But I enjoy listening to her detailed stories about her experiences in combat or her times working as an emergency room nurse. We teach each other new things and learn from each other each time we are together. I taught her how to change the camera settings on her iPhone, and she showed me how to drive a stick shift car, but most importantly, we showed each other that friendship has no boundaries. Despite our polar opposite stances on politics and our 60 something year age difference, our bond is truer and deeper than any other. Kayla K. from Philadelphia was affected by Mr. Sleyon’s and Ms. Guttman’s ability to transcend age and race: I honestly think their story is beautiful. It really captures how we, the human race, should be to each other. At least in Philadelphia, many teenagers disrespect random elders for “fun” and it isn’t respectful either. Mr. Sleyon and Mrs. Guttman made me think about how teenagers/young adults have so much in common with elderly people. Honestly, teenagers from the 1960s went through the same things that teenagers from 2000s are going through, “teenage problems” wise. This story really brings out how people are more alike than they realize. And Lauren Williams from Kent, Ohio, thought the world would be a better place if we all followed Mr. Sleyon’s and Ms. Guttman’s example of friendship: I felt that their story could help many people struggling to see the good in humanity. Their story could help create some change of heart in people who are narrow-minded. By being friends with people who are different than me, it allows room for growth. Not only can I learn about other culture’s, but I can learn about other people and how to make the world a better place. I feel that if more people followed this philosophy, that overall the world could improve drastically. Alyssa S from NWHS told us how she has formed bonds with people who are different from her: I do have some unlikely friendships. I volunteer at a school for very low-functioning people ages five to twenty-one. Through my volunteer work, I have developed many unlikely friendships. I have built a relationship with the teachers and other staff members as well as the students. My relationship with the students is rather unlikely because none of the students can hold a regular conversation. They are mostly non-verbal and have poor motor skills. This can make it difficult for people to create a friendship with these students, but not for me. I have been able to develop friendships with these students through our differences. Sometimes the unlikely friendships are the best friendships. Given his relationship with his best friend, Douglas Johnson from Philadelphia believes it is entirely possible to be friends with people different from you, as long as you have trust and understanding: My best friend is someone that i’d never see myself being close with or having a bond with , maybe it’s how they present themselves on their exterior that made me form this conclusion but the purpose is I was wrong.When times were not exactly “sunshine and rainbows“ for me , he extended a hand that I needed or else I wouldn’t have overcome some of the things that bring me here today , and it’s been that way ever since and I don’t see this friendship fading. Being friends with someone who is different from you of course has its challenges but it comes with plenty of benefits that out-weight the challenges , you learn how to not judge people and adapt to the fact that everyone is different. So to answer your question I find Mr.Sleyon and Ms.Guttman’s story intriguing because I found an unlikely friendship in my own best friend. Michelle Lopez from Georgia agreed: I believe it definitely is possible for two people to be friends with very different backgrounds because friendships aren’t about physical appearance or where they come from, it’s about whether that person is always there for you when you need them the most. Aamir B from Philly thought one could learn a lot from being friends with others from different backgrounds: To build a solid relationship across differences I believe there must be room for change and acceptance. I have unlikely friendships and I met this friend by playing basketball at a local park with him. We kept our friendship over time by accepting our differences and experiencing our differences (coming to accept them) NYC.EC from Paris believes having different friends can enrich one’s life: It is not necessarely similarities between two people that make them get along with each other, it plays a part but a good friendship is mainly built on the foundation of common values. That means your friend shares your spiritual, moral, and ethical convictions. It is cool to hang out with people who are similar to us but hanging out with people who are different makes us more open-minded. _________ Image Credit Jens Mortensen for The New York Times In the midst of the holiday season, several students took a moment to reminisce on their “ Toys From the Past .” khushi from nwhs shared fond memories of his Nintendo DS and games: My favorite toy from my childhood was my Nintendo DS lite. I remember that every birthday, Christmas, and Diwali, my parents would let me buy one new game and I played for hours. My favorite memories were when my brother and I set up a tent or fort in the house. Once it was built, we would hang out in them, both of us playing on our Gameboy advances or DS’s for hours. We would even play our Pokemon games together, which did eventually lead to a lot of fighting. Some of my other favorite games were the Littlest Pet Shop games, and even the Lego Harry Potter games. But my favorite by far, was Pokemon. My brother and I had at least one game from each generation of games, and we shared all of them. Jenny from Germantown recalled this 1990s relic: Growing up, Tamagotchis were the hottest new item. I remember being glued to the egg-shaped piece of plastic that showed a digital pet and it’s life cycle as time went on. I mainly kept this gem with me because my wish of a real pet was never fulfilled and the little digital pet satisfied me enough. Both my brother and I couldn’t stand a second away from the Tamagotchis because we were so afraid that our pets would pass away. Teddy Popescu from Maryland was nostalgic for the groundbreaking technology in each generation of toys: Looking back at toys from the past is nostalgic not because they would be much fun now, the technology back then and the ability to create these toys is a lot lower than what we have today and many these toys would be subpar, the nostalgia comes at how innovative and groundbreaking they were at the time, and how much fun they gave during those times. The NES release of 1985 is a huge example, as nowadays the graphics are old, the 8 bit capabilities provided limited options for what sort of games could be designed and created, and compared to the video games we have today would have no chance of being a reliable and better experience. But back then, during a time when the entire industry was on the brink of collapse, this was incredible, as games like Super Mario Bros and Megaman brought lots of challenge, fun, and choices to the player in an interactive sort of system that had never been seen before. These games were the first step into truly allowing the player to do what they wanted to do as you could explore where you wanted in the original Zelda, try a different route of bosses through Megaman and try and beat Mario faster than you did last time. _________ Image Eclipse-watchers on Nye Beach in Newport, Ore., on Aug. 21. Credit Toni Greaves for The New York Times In response to our question “ What Were the Most Important Scientific Developments of 2017? ”, students shared what they learned. Sam Pelletier from Danvers, Mass., made connections among these scientific developments, politics, current events and his science class: I think the most interesting and important developments mentioned are the ones regarding cancer in African patients, because it brings to light another thing that we take advantage of here, such as healthcare that can cure the cureable, and shows that with the right research, we can make a big impact in places that aren’t the US. I think anything concerning global climate change was important to this year, because there has been enough evidence put forward that scientists renewed their concerns. While I think it is important to understand what’s going on in our universe or even our solar system, it might be hard to do so if climate change continues to build so that the Earth isn’t liveable. From these discoveries I’ve learned that it is important to look beyond where we live in helping other people survive and live with today’s medical help, however it is also important not to zoom out too far so that we’re missing important discoveries, such as global change right here in the US. Ben Scourfield from Ohio was fascinated by the evolution of wolves to dogs and shared a discovery he recently learned about: The most interesting breakthrough is that you can not make wolves into puppies because you’d think after spending so much time with them they would turn out like normal dogs. There was just a discovery in Antartica that showed there are bacteria living in Antartica that are surviving on carbon dioxide, hydrogen, and carbon monoxide; this is clearly a large breakthrough because this could change the way we look for extraterrestrial life. John Bailey from Kent, Ohio, saw how one scientific event could impact his own future: I think the most important and interesting development is the breakthrough in fetal surgeries. This can save so many lives that we could have not saved in the past. This could impact my life in such a way that i now could have new career options if i chose to follow a career of a doctor. Bill Wolford from Ohio observed the political and personal implications of two findings in health and science: I remember learning something in my science class about obesity. It was that while our body has more muscle than fat, fat will be easier to gain. While fat takes up to almost twice as much space muscle it weighs less. Fat is also relatively hard for our bodies to burn that is why obesity is such a normal thing in this day and age. Since processed food is cheaper and easier to push onto people the developing countries are falling prey to the corporations that will take advantage of their hardships. Another scientific event I watched a T.E.D talk on. An engineer created something called re-composition. It has the same effect as a funeral but instead of keeping the body from decomposing like normal services, this method turns the body into soil with wood chips and a body. The idea was formed from an article about farmers composting whole cow carcasses. And Vi from NYC suggested that schools could be the key to making more scientific developments like these: Out of the two developments mentioned above, I think the one on obesity is more consequential. It sheds light on the fact that every one of us should be more attentive to the food we consume. Developments in the food processing industry sure have had an impact on the availability of food, but they are taking a toll on our health. Another interesting scientific development I have read about is one on how graphite can be turned into diamond. Obviously, it has huge consequences on the jewelry industry, but maybe also on our own lives. I was thinking...if every school had a lab that would facilitate these experiments, a lot of problems would be solved. _________ Image Although Russia is barred from the 2018 Winter Olympics in South Korea over its widespread doping, individual athletes who can prove their innocence may compete under a neutral flag. The Russian figure skater Evgenia Medvedeva, shown at a competition in Japan in November, declined to say if she would participate under those conditions. Credit Kim Kyung-Hoon/Reuters Our Student Opinion prompt “ Will Banning Russia From the 2018 Winter Games Stop Future Doping in the Olympics? ” was a popular one. Hannah from Georgia was succinct: I think Russia should be kicked out of the Olympics because they cheated, I don’t think it will keep them from cheating in the future though. Karly Feltman from LGHS took the same view: I believe that Russia got the punishment they deserved. The use of steroids is unfair and unjust, and being barred from the Olympics is a big hit for Russian morale, and maybe, will cause them to see why it is wrong. Lauren Li Singapore articulated the ongoing struggle: I think the Russian has gotten off easier than how other countries would be treated if without their power, money, context Russia has. It is also important to think about the significance of the Olympics to Russia (Olympic victories as means to strengthen patriotism for a predominantly poor/middle-class majority, also the elections that is coming up for Putin) and consequently vice versa (Russia’s contribution to the Olympics as a whole via. hosting the 2014, state-sponsored doping for more straight-forward sports like speed-skating & bobsleigh, state-sponsored bribing &/ implementing judges to gain advantage for their home athletes for more ‘subjective’ sports like figure skating). The scale of the Russians cheating have been addressed nor accounted for to its full extent. Doping is one thing (we have been given concrete evidence to prove unfairness via. whistleblowers and science), but there are other underlying wrongs that have not been given the same opportunity to see the light of day. Polaris Hall from Danvers High School, Mass., sees the difficulty in enforcement: Drug use in athletics is hard to control. While I feel that this was an appropriate punishment - one that shuns the systematic doping of athletes led and condoned by the state, while still allowing innocent individuals to compete for personal glory. Sine Russia is a nation that often shows its power through sports, I have hopes that this message will hit home. But in all honesty, I don’t think it will work. Micro-dosing and new evasive techniques and strains will continue to allow doped athletes into competition - the big question is how to catch them and how to stop them. It won’t be easy. One may argue that a state that promotes, encourages, and provides doping for its athletes may be too far gone to reason with - and this may be true. A systematic doping issue is serious business, but unsurprising, but the fact that the nation as a whole is responsible rather than a select team or doctor shows just how large the issue is. Until we are able to have a total overhaul of the system, things aren’t going to change. Thomas Higgins of Wilmington, N.C., thinks doping will endure: The Olympic committee doing this was a huge step that was definitely needed. Even though it was important and much needed it won’t stop future doping as long as people have a way to gain a competitive edge, they’re going to take it plain and simple no matter how wrong it is. People want to win, and if it’s doping that is going too that many people especially at the Olympic level will indeed do it. That is the sad reality of human nature, until the procedures become even better to regulate doping it will continually happen. Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              