   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Arts Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Weekend Miser Campsites in the Heart of New York City By  Jonathan Wolfe May 28, 2015 New Yorkers don’t go camping. The Miser is routinely reminded of this adage whenever the suggestion to spend a few nights outdoors is pooh-poohed by city-dwelling friends. It’s a shame because there are some great opportunities to pitch a tent in the city. Floyd Bennett Field in Brooklyn was New York City’s first municipal airport. Today it’s a leafy park surrounded by Jamaica Bay that offers 32 tent campsites for year-round outings. It’s best to visit when warm weather allows for kayaking through the salt marshes of the Jamaica Bay Wildlife Refuge, framed by the Manhattan skyline in the distance. While gliding through the bay this time of year you might spot a diamondback terrapin laying her eggs in the sand dunes or glimpse the increasingly rare Monarch butterfly as it migrates north. As in Brooklyn, the seven campsites at Fort Wadsworth in Staten Island (open through Sept. 27) are primitive grassy plots with a picnic table and fire ring. Reservations for both locations are $30 a night, not exactly a Miserly fee, but for a family or group of friends (sites accommodate up to six people), it’s cheaper than a B&B in the countryside. Public restrooms and showers are also available. But when you’re camping, why shower? After a waterfront baseball game or soccer match at Miller Field (reservations required), cool off and clean up with a dip in the ocean at one of the beaches at Great Kills Park, a short walk away. Lifeguards are on duty from 10 a.m. to 6 p.m. throughout the summer. (Floyd Bennett Field, 50 Aviation Road, Brooklyn; 718-713-2501, nps.gov/gate. Fort Wadsworth, 220 New York Avenue, Staten Island; 718-354-4655, nps.gov/gate. Camping reservations for both locations can be made online at recreation.gov.) If traveling to Brooklyn or Staten Island is too much of a trek, how about roughing it in Central Park? The New York City Department of Parks and Recreation offers free “family camping” excursions across the five boroughs — Central Park is included, as are Prospect Park in Brooklyn and Alley Pond Park in Queens. For truly uninitiated city slickers, Urban Rangers will help set up tents, conduct s’more toasting lessons and take groups on night hikes in search of nocturnal critters. Owing to high demand, camping participants are selected by lottery, which you can enter on the city parks website. Sarah Aucoin, director of the Urban Park Rangers, recommends the outing in Pelham Bay Park in the Bronx. Ms. Aucoin says that park’s wildlife, rocky cliffs and throngs of fireflies evoke the jagged Maine coast — but within walking distance of the subway. (Through Sept. 11. For more information and to register for the lottery visit nycgovparks.org/programs/rangers/registration.) MUSIC FESTIVAL OPENS The closest some people will get to overnight camping this summer is a nap on a blanket in the park. In that case, the Rite of Summer Music Festival on Governors Island, now open for the season, is just outdoorsy enough. On Saturday, this monthly series of free classical music in the Nolan Park section of the island begins with a performance by the baritone John Brancy and the pianist Peter Dugan. The pair will present an afternoon of music by Gershwin, Dvorak, Bernstein, Chopin and the Beatles. If the island’s bucolic surroundings inspire a thirst for ruggedness, you can join a free outdoor fitness class and group run hosted by the Rise boot camp or a yoga class from Pop Up Yoga NYC, part of the citywide OutdoorFest. (“Rite of Summer Music Festival”: 1 and 3 p.m.; Nolan Park, Governors Island; 917-359-4449, riteofsummer.com. The Rise: group run at 2 p.m., fitness class at 3 p.m. Yoga: 12:30 p.m. Fitness classes meet at Colonels’ Row. Ferries to Governors Island run from South Ferry, in Lower Manhattan, and from Brooklyn Bridge Park. Ferry schedules are at govisland.com.) A version of this article appears in print on , on Page C 29 of the New York edition . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              