   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Sports Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Sports Business Charlie Engle Runs for His Life, Once Again Image Charlie Engle, left, at the start of the Big Backyard Ultra in Bell Buckle, Tenn., in which he ran 112.5 miles in 27 hourlong spurts last month. Credit Kevin D. Liles for The New York Times By  Joe Nocera Nov. 17, 2016 It was a warm Saturday morning in October, and on a 50-acre farm just north of Bell Buckle, Tenn. (pop. 425), 46 runners gathered at the starting line, preparing to run one of the quirkiest, yet most arduous, of races. Called the Big Backyard Ultra, the race required contestants to run a course that spanned 4.167 miles, over trails etched out of the farm, every hour. If you finished faster than an hour, you got five or 10 minutes to rest or eat or go to the bathroom before the next round. If it took you longer than an hour, you were out. The race would keep going, hour after blessed hour, until there was only one runner left. The reason the Big Backyard Ultra’s founder, Gary Cantrell , had chosen 4.167 miles for his course is that if you ran 24 loops in 24 hours, you’d have gone exactly 100 miles. (And the reason Cantrell named it Big Backyard Ultra was because, (a) Big was the name of his dog, and (b) the farm on which the race was run was, in fact, his backyard.) Virtually all the runners had ultramarathon experience. Andy Pearson , 31, had won a 100-miler in Pine, Ariz., just the month before, with a time of 23 hours 16 minutes 31 seconds. Babak Rastgoufard, 43, had placed third in a 100-kilometer race in Friant, Calif., last November. One man told me he would soon be running from Maine to Florida. Another said he was using this race as preparation for a coming 100K race. I had come to watch an ultramarathoner, Charlie Engle, whom Runner’s World had once described as “renowned.” At the age of 54, Engle has been running long races — marathons, adventure treks and ultramarathons — since his late 20s. He is not a very fast runner, nor a very stylish one, but he has a skill that’s much more important for the kind of race he prefers: an unusual ability to fight through pain and fatigue. He told me recently that the moment he craves is the moment when every fiber of his being screams “quit.” “I need that moment when I think, ‘This sucks,’” is how he put it. When he first started running, Engle did it as a form of penance — “I was feeling badly about myself and wanted to punish myself,” he said. Then, as he realized he was good at running long distances, ultramarathons — and other, even more extreme events — became a way to test his limits and, to some extent, build his celebrity. Five years ago, running took on another role in his life: It helped keep him sane. Now, Engle runs long distances not only because he loves it but because it is one thing he can do that nobody can take away from him. To put it another way, running has saved his life. Image Engle said he started running to punish himself. Credit Kevin D. Liles for The New York Times Liar Loan Troubles The first time I ever spoke to Engle, he was calling me from a telephone in a minimum-security prison in Beaver, W.Va. This was in the spring of 2011, three years after the financial crisis. In the wake of that crisis, millions of people lost their homes because, during the bubble, they had taken on subprime mortgages they ultimately couldn’t afford. Engle, who had gotten caught up in the housing bubble, was in prison for mortgage fraud. At the time, I was writing columns in the business section of The New York Times, a number of which focused on the unwillingness of the Justice Department to hold accountable the top executives of the companies that had led the country over the cliff, like Angelo Mozilo of Countrywide . And yet here was this smallest of small fries, who had lost two houses during the subprime crisis, sentenced to 21 months in jail for supposedly committing bank fraud. The more I looked into it, the sketchier the whole situation seemed. It had begun after an Internal Revenue Service agent watched a documentary , produced by Matt Damon, about an expedition Engle had organized, a grueling 111-day, 4,500-mile run across the Sahara. The agent started wondering how Engle had time to earn a living with all the time he spent running. He opened an investigation — it included Dumpster dives outside Engle’s apartment — that found nothing wrong with his taxes. But an undercover female agent, assigned to befriend Engle, got him to brag about taking a couple of “liar loans” while she secretly had a tape recorder rolling. Image Followed by a crew filming a documentary about an 111-day, 4,500-mile race across the Sahara, Engle carried a mattress for a nap. Credit Nasser Nasser/Associated Press Liar loan is the term for loans in which people overstate their incomes to qualify for mortgages they probably shouldn’t have. Millions of people took out liar loans during the housing bubble, just as Engle did. Thousands of brokers encouraged them to do so, just as Engle’s broker did. And as it turns out, the evidence against Engle was so thin that the jury found him innocent of providing false information to the bank — even as it was convicting him of bank fraud. Go figure. The point I made in the column is that there’s something wrong with a system that sends Charlie Engle to prison and lets Angelo Mozilo go free. It doesn’t often happen this way, but something good came out of my column: It helped Engle get a book contract. Two months ago, the book, titled “Running Man,” was published. The first quarter of it tells the harrowing story of Engle as a young addict who can’t resist either booze or drugs, who drives away people who love him, and who has a number of close calls during late-night cocaine buys. And then, after a binge, he runs to purge his guilt. Engle’s first marathon takes place the morning after a cocaine binge. When he finally starts taking sobriety seriously, after the birth of his first child, running marathons becomes his focus. In 1996, in Australia, Engle mistakenly enrolls in a 52K — not seeing the 2, he thinks it is a 5K. There comes a point in the race when Engle realizes that he actually craves the pain: “The pain told me to go on,” he writes. “Feel the pain, welcome the pain, use the pain, transcend the pain.” He somehow finishes the race, and his career as a long-distance runner is born. For the next decade-plus, Engle constantly tries to find ever more difficult challenges. He runs in Eco-Challenges around the globe. He runs Badwater , the 135-mile, Death-Valley-to-Mount-Whitney race that many consider the toughest in the world. The first time he runs it, he comes in eighth. He follows that with two third-place finishes, and two fourth-place finishes. With heat that can go as high as 130 degrees and cold as low as 30 degrees, it is his favorite race. Image Engle eventually ran Badwater, the 135-mile, Death-Valley-to-Mount-Whitney race that he once mimicked running while in prison, several times, including in 2013. Credit David McNew/Getty Images In 2006, with cameras in tow, Engle runs across the Sahara with two other runners. Two years later, Engle participates in a second documentary, running across America with Marshall Ulrich, a renowned ultramarathoner in his own right. (The race results in a falling-out between the two men.) He has sponsors. He makes motivational speeches. And he dabbles in real estate speculation, buying and selling a dozen homes before the bubble bursts. After which, of course, it all falls apart. There weren’t any other runners in prison, Engle explains in “Running Man,” but there was a small gravel track. A little at a time, Engle began running on it. Others began to join him, mostly men who were out of shape and for whom he became an exercise coach as well. It wasn’t long before running became his prison therapy. He got the nickname Running Man from his fellow inmates. But he also needed a goal — something not just to occupy him but to motivate him. So he decided to run 135 miles, the same length as Badwater, and to do it on the same day in July that Badwater was being held on the West Coast. Of course he had to prepare — at one point the prison was in lockdown, and he couldn’t get outdoors to do the 15-miler he had planned that day. So he ran the equivalent of 15 miles in place in his cell. And although it took him two days — because he had to go back to his cell at night — he pulled it off, running 81 miles the first day and 54 the next. “Prison officials weren’t too happy about it,” recalled Howell Weltz, a former prison inmate who befriended Engle and confirmed Engle’s account of prison life. “They tried to bust it up by saying he was violating the rules by not wearing a T-shirt,’’ Weltz said. “Charlie calmly walked over to where his T-shirt was, put it on, and then continued running. He has a lot of guts.” (The warden, William Vest, declined to comment on Engle’s account of his running pursuits in prison, saying, “I don’t even remember him.”) Engle’s descriptions of that run — the way other inmates sidled up to him to quietly root him on; his dealing with prison rules during the run; the sheer satisfaction and even joy he took from running 540 laps on a rutty track in a West Virginia prison — are the highlight of “Running Man.” The book ends with Engle getting out of prison, falling in love with a woman named Stacey Hatcher, whom he marries, and preparing to run — what else? — Badwater. Image Engle dressed for the Big Backyard Ultra in his hotel room. Credit Kevin D. Liles for The New York Times Loop After Loop After Loop Big Backyard Ultra is hardly Badwater, but it’s not chopped liver, either. What makes it so difficult is partly that it has no definite end — it might go 20 hours, or it might go 40. Second, in races of 75 or 100 miles, runners can afford to have a bad stretch, during which they will walk, down food and aspirin, and try to regather themselves. In this race, a bad stretch means you’re out of the race because you won’t finish the loop in the allotted hour. Cantrell, who has organized a handful of other long races besides this one, particularly enjoyed the psychological dimension to Big Backyard Ultra. “Once it gets down to a handful of contenders, it becomes a mental game,” he said as he stroked his long gray beard and puffed on a cigarette. “You don’t want to show pain. If you show pain, the others will try to put you out.” Engle and Hatcher had driven from Durham, N.C., an eight-hour trip, the day before the race. I met them in a hotel lobby, where Engle explained how being in prison had affected his life. “I can’t vote. I can’t own a house,” he said. “Yesterday, when I tried to rent a car to come here, I was turned down.” He sometimes gets spooked when someone knocks on the door. Although Saucony gives him shoes, he has lost his paying sponsors. He and Hatcher have sometimes been turned down when they’ve tried to rent a place. Oh, and he makes monthly payments to Bank of America for the $262,000 the court says he owes in restitution. Image Engle and his wife, Stacey Hatcher, his sole crew member, laid out food and drink for him to eat between loops at the Big Backyard Ultra. Credit Kevin D. Liles for The New York Times By the time I arrived at Cantrell’s farm, a little before the 7 a.m. start, Engle and Hatcher had set up a table filled with food (energy bars, nuts, Fig Newtons), liquid (coconut water, chocolate almond milk) and supplies (headlamp, and blister-popping kit, among other things). Tents were scattered around the lawn as the runners approached the starting line. They stood behind an official-looking timing clock and began running when Cantrell rang a cowbell. I could actually hear cows in the background. There were some people here who knew what had happened to Engle five years earlier, but most didn’t. They knew him as a runner — one they all respected. “He’s an older guy,” Cantrell said, “but he’s durable and mentally tough.” He added, “This race plays to his strengths.” Engle once had a reputation for arrogance; in the documentary “Running the Sahara,” he is shown berating his fellow runners when they want to quit the run. But now, people told me, he was the friendliest and most helpful of runners. Weeks earlier, Engle had helped prepare a young runner named Pete Kostelnick, who was hoping to break the record for the fastest run across America. (He did, handily .) Even while Engle was at Big Backyard Ultra, Kostelnick’s crew checked in daily to update him and ask advice. Engle’s times during the first handful of loops were between 52 and 55 minutes. He wore earphones and listened to the novel “Darktown” as he ran. He was never first, but never last either. Between laps, he would down some food, gulp some water, say a few words to other runners and take encouragement from his wife, who was serving as his crew. Image Runners competing in the Big Backyard Ultra. Credit Kevin D. Liles for The New York Times By the ninth loop, the field was down to 18 runners; Hatcher speculated that the unseasonably warm day was taking a toll on the runners, including Engle. “The thrill is gone,” he said to her, as he tried to replenish the calories he was losing. Then he went to the starting line for the 10th loop. By 7 a.m. the next morning — by which time 100 miles had been run — there were only four runners left, including Pearson, Rastgoufard and Engle. The younger two were running strong, sometimes finishing laps in less than 50 minutes — and looking as though they could go on forever. Engle was hurting — and seeing how easily they were running wasn’t helping matters. “I got my wish,” he said with a wry smile. “I’m suffering.” He added: “I’ve been struggling for a while. I keep hoping something is going to change.” On the 27th loop, Rastgoufard came in at 48 minutes, and Pearson — who himself was starting to struggle — followed at 52. Engle was nowhere to be seen. Finally, Hatcher saw him in the woods with a minute and a half to go. He crossed the finish line 30 seconds before the 28th lap was to start. He turned to Cantrell and said, “No más.” Image Engle finished third in the Big Backyard Ultra, running 112.5 miles over 27 hours. Credit Kevin D. Liles for The New York Times “I’m not sure why, but I think he got dehydrated,” Hatcher said. He had run 112.5 miles in 27 hours. (Rastgoufard won the race when Pearson dropped out one lap later.) After he and Hatcher had returned to Durham, he sent me an email. “It was not a great race for me,” he wrote. “I felt lethargic from the start. I don’t know why. There is no real way to pinpoint exactly why I feel better or worse during any given event. That’s part of the challenge, to keep going even when not performing at my best.” One thing I had pressed him on was why he enjoyed a sport that seemed so far beyond what most humans would be willing to endure. He’d had a hard time explaining it, beyond the idea that he liked to push through pain. Now, in the email, he tried again. “I don’t run solely to suffer,” he wrote. “I run to explore other places and also to explore myself. Running is a mechanism that lets me focus on one task … forward movement. It’s like removing all the clutter in the closet in order to see the actual closet space. Running organizes what’s there and helps me get rid of things I don’t need.” Image Engle looked fresh at the beginning of his ordeal. Credit Kevin D. Liles for The New York Times Email: nocera@nytimes.com Twitter: @NoceraNYT  A version of this article appears in print on , on Page B 9 of the New York edition with the headline: Running for His Life, Once Again . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Related Coverage ‘How Much Suffering Can You Take?’ Nov. 1, 2016 Image Faster, Farther, More Frequent: Ultramarathon Runners Keep Pushing Limits Nov. 4, 2016 Image Ultra Runner Karl Meltzer Sets Appalachian Trail Record, Fueled by Beer and Candy Sept. 18, 2016 Image Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              