   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Soccer Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by FIFA Trial Opens With References to Cash Drops and Bag Men Image José Maria Marin, center, the former head of Brazil’s soccer federation, arrived at the federal courthouse in Brooklyn on Monday for the first day of the FIFA corruption trial. Credit Darren Ornitz/Reuters By  Rebecca R. Ruiz Nov. 13, 2017 Leer en español Six years after the United States began investigating international soccer officials for corruption, and two years after dozens of them were indicted , three aging South American men settled into their seats in an overflowing, wood-paneled courtroom in Brooklyn on Monday for the start of the FIFA trial. The three defendants on trial, facing charges of racketeering conspiracy as well as wire fraud and money laundering conspiracy, were Manuel Burga of Peru, Juan Ángel Napout of Paraguay and José Maria Marin of Brazil. Each man is a former president of his country’s soccer association, and the most serious charges that each faces carry up to 20 years in prison. With references to cash drops, “bag men,” and efforts to obstruct justice, the prosecution’s opening statement echoed the organized crime cases with which the assistant United States attorneys gathered in the courtroom had significant experience. “These defendants cheated the sport in order to line their own pockets,” Keith D. Edelman, an assistant United States attorney for the Eastern District of New York, said as he introduced FIFA — global soccer’s governing body — to jurors through analogies to the N.F.L. and Major League Baseball. “They used code words, hidden bank accounts all around the world, shell companies, fake contracts,” Mr. Edelman said, describing schemes through which Mr. Burga, Mr. Napout and Mr. Marin are accused of soliciting and accepting bribes from business executives in exchange for lucrative television and marketing contracts. “For over 20 years, the defendants and their co-conspirators have abused the system.” Of the more than 40 defendants charged by American authorities in the far-reaching case , Mr. Burga, Mr. Napout and Mr. Marin are the only ones who have been extradited to the United States and who continue to maintain their innocence. The first defendant to be sentenced in the case, a former Guatemalan judge, received eight months in prison last month. According to prosecutors, Mr. Napout accepted bribes in cash; Mr. Marin received them in a New York bank account; and Mr. Burga — wary of accepting money while under criminal investigation in Peru — accepted promises of future payments. But lawyers for the defendants contended Monday that the government, while effective at uncovering corruption, had wrongly implicated their clients. “What this case is about is a government concluding that everyone involved at high levels of soccer is dirty,” said Silvia B. Piñera-Vazquez, a lawyer for Mr. Napout. “The F.B.I. and the I.R.S. did a wonderful job,” she added, referencing what she called at least “tens of millions of dollars” spent on the federal investigation. “But they didn’t find one wire transfer of dirty money into Juan’s accounts.” Bruce L. Udolf, a lawyer for Mr. Burga, similarly credited the government for its efforts. “But they got too ambitious, used too broad a brush,” he said, distancing Mr. Burga from the scores of defendants who have entered guilty pleas in the case and the witnesses poised to testify against the three defendants in coming weeks. In introducing the case to the anonymous jury — chosen last week after documented attempts at intimidation — Mr. Edelman, who was among the prosecutors who worked on the latest charges announced against the Bonanno organized crime family earlier this year, opened with an anecdote closer to home for the jury of New Yorkers. He described a party at the St. Regis Hotel in Miami, celebrating a South American tournament brought to the United States through coordinated bribe payments. The defense lawyers — emphasizing the sprawling web of relationships in international soccer and the long arm of American justice — urged the jury not to jump to conclusions about their clients simply because of their associations with convicted criminals. “If you’ve ever watched kids playing soccer, there are always one or two, they’re standing there but they’re not really playing,” Charles Stillman, Mr. Marin’s lawyer, said, likening his 85-year-old client to a clueless bystander. “He is like the youngster on the side picking up daisies.” A version of this article appears in print on , on Page B 10 of the New York edition with the headline: FIFA Corruption Trial Opens With Talk of ‘Bag Men’ . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Related Coverage FIFA Corruption: Top Officials Arrested in Pre-Dawn Raid at Zurich Hotel Dec. 3, 2015 Image Guatemalan Soccer Executive Gets 8 Months in FIFA Corruption Case Oct. 25, 2017 Image FIFA Shares Results of Investigation and Tries to Turn the Page March 31, 2017 Image Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              