   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Pro Basketball Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by N.B.A. Roundup Nets Let Opportunities Slip in Push for Late Comeback By  The Associated Press Nov. 18, 2015 Nicolas Batum had 24 points and 8 assists, and the Charlotte Hornets held off the visiting Nets, 116-111, on Wednesday. The teams entered the fourth quarter tied at 84-84, but the Hornets began to pull away. The Nets cut the Hornets’ lead to 112-108 with two minutes remaining, but they ruined an opportunity to make it a one-possession game as Thaddeus Young, who had 27 points on 11-of-17 shooting, missed an easy follow shot. The Hornets kept giving the Nets chances to win the game. Jeremy Lin turned over the ball with 33 seconds left, but Brook Lopez missed a short jumper. Then Batum made an errant pass that sailed out of bounds. Again, the Nets failed to take advantage as Lopez was called for an illegal screen at midcourt, giving the Hornets possession. “It could be a little fatigue, but there are no excuses for missed opportunities,” Young said of the Nets’ miscues. “We had every chance to win that game and it slipped by us.” Brook Lopez added 23 points and Jarrett Jack and Joe Johnson each had 16 for the struggling Nets. “Nic Batum is such a good playmaker as well as a scorer,” Nets coach Lionel Hollins said. “He was making plays at the basket and when we had to help he got the ball back out to the 3-point line and they made them.” ROCKETS 108, BLAZERS 103 James Harden scored 45 points, including all 9 for host Houston in overtime, and the Rockets won after firing Kevin McHale. Corey Brewer made a 3-pointer with less than a second left to force overtime, and Harden took over from there. The interim coach J. B. Bickerstaff, son of the longtime N.B.A. coach Bernie Bickerstaff, served in his first game as head coach. MAVERICKS 106, CELTICS 102 Dirk Nowitzki scored 23 points, Wesley Matthews had 18, and Dallas erased an 18-point first-half deficit to win at Boston. Dallas trailed by 89-82 with just under eight minutes to play before going on a 14-2 run. The Celtics closed to 104-102 and had the ball, but Raymond Felton stole it in the final seconds. MAGIC 104, T’WOLVES 101 Evan Fournier scored 26 points and hit a 3-pointer with 3.1 seconds left in overtime to lift Orlando at home. Minnesota’s Andrew Wiggins (28 points) banked in a driving layup with 2.1 seconds left in regulation to make it 93-93, and Karl-Anthony Towns blocked a layup at the buzzer. HAWKS 103, KINGS 97 Paul Millsap scored 23 points, making a running one-hander with 15.7 seconds remaining as Atlanta held on for a home win. The Hawks, who had lost their last two games by a combined 3 points, had a 99-88 lead with 2:49 left. Sacramento responded by going on a 9-0 run. But Millsap made sure they did not drop another close one. THUNDER 110, PELICANS 103 Russell Westbrook had 43 points, 9 rebounds and 8 assists, leading Oklahoma City to a home win. The Thunder are 2-2 without the injured Kevin Durant. New Orleans suited up only nine players, and Anthony Davis sat out with a shoulder injury. PACERS 112, 76ERS 85 Paul George scored 34 points, and C. J. Miles added 20 to lead Indiana in a rout of Philadelphia. The host 76ers turned over the ball 31 times while dropping to 0-12. They committed 18 turnovers in the first half and trailed by 52-38 at halftime. Philadelphia also received a technical foul in the half for having too many players on the floor. SPURS 109, NUGGETS 98 Tony Parker scored a season-high 25 points, and the San Antonio never trailed en route to a home win. Parker took advantage of the rookie Emmanuel Mudiay’s defensive aggression to keep him off balance with a series of drives for layups and runners. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page B 17 of the New York edition with the headline: Nets Let Opportunities Slip in Push for Late Comeback . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              