   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Music Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Stanley Dural Jr., Founder of Buckwheat Zydeco, Dies at 68 Image Stanley Dural Jr., known as Buckwheat, center, performing with Paul Simon at a 2005 benefit at Lincoln Center for victims of Hurricane Katrina. At left, Mr. Dural’s son, Sir Reginald M. Dural, plays rubboard. Credit Heidi Schumann for The New York Times By  Jon Pareles Sept. 24, 2016 Stanley Dural Jr., better known as Buckwheat , the accordionist whose band carried zydeco music from the Louisiana bayous to a worldwide audience, died on Saturday in Lafayette, La., where he was born. He was 68. Ted Fox, his manager and frequent producer, said the cause was lung cancer. Buckwheat lived in the neighboring city of Carencro. Formed in 1979, his band, Buckwheat Zydeco, barnstormed for more than 30 years, winning both a Grammy and an Emmy Award along the way. With his broad-brimmed black hat, glasses and a white piano accordion emblazoned with the words “BUCK WHEAT,” Mr. Dural became the face of zydeco for many listeners far beyond the music’s Gulf Coast regional circuit. He played festivals worldwide and sat in, on stage and on recordings, with a host of rock and pop musicians, including Eric Clapton, Paul Simon, U2, Willie Nelson, Robert Plant and Keith Richards. Buckwheat’s music melded Louisiana Creole traditions — the tootling propulsion of the accordion and the clatter of the rubboard, a metal vest played with spoons — with the R&B he grew up on in the 1950s and ’60s and with rock. He sang in French Creole and in English, leading his band in two-steps, waltzes, shuffles, blues and funk, all of which kept dance floors active. Buckwheat Zydeco was celebrated as one of the world’s great party bands. Stanley Joseph Dural Jr. was born on Nov. 14, 1947. His family, with six brothers and six sisters, shared a two-bedroom house in Lafayette; growing up, he picked cotton. His father was an accordionist who played Creole music, but Stanley Jr. was drawn to R&B, and chose the organ as his instrument. He was nicknamed Buckwheat for his braided hair, which resembled the character Buckwheat, played by William Thomas Jr. in “The Little Rascals” short films. He made his first recordings in the early 1970s with his 15-piece soul band, Buckwheat and the Hitchhikers, and had a local hit with the single “It’s Hard to Get.” Buckwheat rediscovered zydeco in 1976, becoming the organist in the band, which was led by Clifton Chenier . A pioneer in merging Creole music and blues, Mr. Chenier was universally acknowledged as the Gulf Coast’s king of zydeco until his death in 1987. Image Mr. Dural performing at the New Orleans Jazz and Heritage Festival in 2011. Credit Patrick Semansky/Associated Press Buckwheat took up accordion in 1978; a year later he started his own zydeco band. At first he called it the Buckwheat Zydeco Ils Sont Partis Band, from the Creole French announcement he had heard at horse races at Evangeline Downs, which was then in Carencro: “They’re off!” In the early 1980s the band recorded for blues and folk labels: Blues Unlimited, Black Top and Rounder. In 1986, he signed a five-album deal with a major label, Island Records, and the band became simply Buckwheat Zydeco. Its touring circuit grew. In 1988 the band opened for Eric Clapton on a tour that stretched across North America and to the Royal Albert Hall in London. Buckwheat Zydeco returned largely to independent labels for albums in the 1990s and 2000s, including Buckwheat’s own label, Tomorrow Records. The band worked constantly, from club dates in Louisiana to festival appearances in Montreux in Switzerland. Television, film and advertising producers seeking Louisiana atmosphere placed his songs on many soundtracks, and Buckwheat performed and helped to write the theme song for “Pierre Franey’s Cooking in America” on PBS. The band appeared at events for both presidential inaugurations of Bill Clinton; it also opened on the last show of “Late Night With Jimmy Fallon,” playing Bob Dylan’s “On a Night Like This.” In 1996, Buckwheat Zydeco performed at the closing ceremony of the Olympic Games in Atlanta. And in 2002, Buckwheat shared an Emmy with the composer Brian Keane for the CBS documentary “Pistol Pete: The Life and Times of Pete Maravich,” about the professional basketball star who played for Louisiana State University. The first major label Buckwheat Zydeco album, “On a Night Like This” (Island), from 1987, was nominated for a Grammy. In 2010, Buckwheat Zydeco won the Grammy for Best Zydeco or Cajun Music album for what would be its final album, “Lay Your Burden Down” (Alligator) in 2009. More recently, Buckwheat blogged, with Mr. Fox, his manager, for The Huffington Post and celebrated music and Southwestern Louisiana culture in a documentary YouTube series, “Buckwheat’s World.” Buckwheat’s band included his son, Sir Reginald M. Dural, on rubboard and keyboards. He survives him, along with Buckwheat’s wife, Bernite Dural, and four other children, Stanley Paul Dural III, April Germain Dural, Stacie Durham and Tomorrow Lynn Dural. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page A 24 of the New York edition with the headline: Stanley Dural Jr., 68; Founded Buckwheat Zydeco Band . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              