   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Pro Basketball Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Jason Kidd’s Bad Rap, Now 20 Years Old Image Jason Kidd needed more one-on-one coaching for his rap career than for his basketball career. Credit Paul K. Buck/Agence France-Presse — Getty Images By  Andrew Keh April 2, 2014 Through 20 years in professional basketball, Jason Kidd has earned a Rookie of the Year award, taken home two Olympic gold medals and won an N.B.A. title. His team, the Brooklyn Nets, is storming toward the playoffs, and Tuesday he was named the N.B.A.'s Eastern Conference coach of the month. And still, Kidd’s career has not been an endless string of triumphs. Case in point: “What the Kidd Didd.” In 1994, as he was beginning his first N.B.A. season, he made a brief and inglorious foray into rap music that has, thankfully, been largely forgotten. Kidd’s contribution to the musical canon consists of four minutes of stilted rhyming over a luxurious G-Funk beat. Sample lyric: “I’m the new kid on the block, but they jock, still/I got skills with the rock.” The song, “What the Kidd Didd,” was Track 10 on a stunt album called “B-Ball’s Best Kept Secret,” which paired 1990s basketball stars like Gary Payton, Cedric Ceballos and Shaquille O’Neal with rappers and producers of the same vintage. The album is out of print but remains available online — Amazon sells a used version for a penny and a new one for $1.96. It is a cultural artifact from another time that developed what could politely be called a cult fan base. “That’s something on my bucket list that I can say I’ve done,” Kidd said recently, “because I’d never do it again.” Kidd’s recording session that summer in Los Angeles was long and torturous. He agreed to the project on a lark after being approached by James Andrews and Hutson Miller, two men in their 20s who were trying to catch a break in the music industry. It was a heady time in hip-hop — the Notorious B.I.G. and Nas released debut albums that year. (Neither appeared on the basketball album — the biggest contributor from the rap world was Warren G, fresh off his hit “Regulate.”) But Andrews and Miller thought they could capture some buzz by pairing athletes with musicians. Happy Walters, the founder of Immortal Records, gave them his enthusiastic backing and a big budget. “Happy basically said: ‘Here’s $300,000. Go make an album,' ” Andrews said. Though Kidd had yet to step onto an N.B.A. court, he seemed like an obvious recruit for the record. He was a top college player and the second overall pick in the 1994 N.B.A. draft. Kidd said he agreed to participate only because of the involvement of Payton and Brian Shaw, two players he admired who were also from Oakland, Calif., as he was. (Today, Shaw coaches the Denver Nuggets.) But after Kidd signed on, a few problems quickly emerged: He knew nothing about rapping; he possessed no discernible musical talent; he had no rhythm. It was clear he would need a coach. Enter Money B, a popular Bay Area rapper who wrote the song’s lyrics and shepherded Kidd through the recording process. Image “B-Ball’s Best Kept Secret” can be purchased today for as little as a penny. Credit Tony Cenicola/The New York Times It turned out to be an inspired pairing. The two had known each other since Kidd’s high school days at St. Joseph Notre Dame in Alameda, Calif. Before games, Kidd listened to “Hang Time,” a song by Money B’s group, Raw Fusion. Money B said their friendship made it easy to ghostwrite lyrics for Kidd. The result was a carefree party jam that recounted Kidd’s rise from high school anonymity to the cusp of N.B.A. stardom. But it was one thing to have words on a page; it was another to record them. “I was nervous,” Kidd said. “That was something way out of my realm. That wasn’t my thing.” The session took place that summer at the Skip Saylor studios in Los Angeles. Alcohol was consumed to loosen the nerves. Lights were turned low. “I can honestly say, by the end of the session, we were probably pretty drunk,” said Money B, who hosts an old-school hip-hop Internet radio show and podcast. Money B advised Kidd to go slowly, rapping one or two lines at a time. Kidd made it through, but the result was, by many accounts, a fractured mess. “If you listen to the track, he’s not using the right inflection, and his tone, when you think it’s supposed to go up, it goes down,” said Money B, who nevertheless praised Kidd’s persistence and willingness to try new things. “Money B was a good coach,” Kidd said, smiling. “We got it done.” Money B said he made sure not to make the lyrics too explicit — there is mild braggadocio and minor profanities. Other players’ songs were more risqué. (Isaiah Rider’s “Funk in the Trunk” was probably the bawdiest track on the album.) The raunchiness kept the album from receiving the N.B.A.'s official backing, which would have increased sales, according to the executive producers. Walters, one of the executive producers, said it sold about 400,000 copies. Kidd wore a checkered shirt and white baseball cap to the album release party that fall at Jerry’s Famous Deli in Los Angeles, where he and some of the players hung out with Dr. Dre. The ensuing buzz around the project was brief. The players and people behind the album joke today that no one ever received any royalty checks. Ceballos, who wrote and recorded the album’s lead single, “Flow On,” which featured Warren G, and also filmed a music video, said he thought “What the Kidd Didd” would be the album’s biggest hit, given its catchy beat. He was wrong. And the song would prove to be Kidd’s last. Sometime after Kidd returned to the Mavericks in 2008, after a long, successful run with the New Jersey Nets, Mark Cuban, the Mavericks owner, discovered “What the Kidd Didd.” As a joke, he arranged to have it played over the arena’s public-address system while Kidd was warming up for a game. Cuban has been complimentary about Kidd’s development this season as a coach. Asked to evaluate Kidd’s lyrical prowess, he said, “His follow-up hits say it all.” Correction :  An article last Thursday about Nets Coach Jason Kidd’s foray into rap music in 1994 misstated part of the title of a song by the former basketball player Cedric Ceballos that was on the same album as one by Kidd. It is “Flow On,” not “Float On.” A version of this article appears in print on , on Page B 14 of the New York edition with the headline: A 20-Year-Old Record Kidd Doesn’t Savor . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Related Coverage Once Stumbling, Nets Are Surging Into Playoffs April 2, 2014 Image Nets’ Surge Earns Jason Kidd a Second Award April 1, 2014 Hawks in a Playoff Race That Isn’t Their Priority April 1, 2014 Image Last Clashes for Nets and Knicks April 1, 2014 Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              