   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Soccer Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Costa Rica 1, United States 0 Costa Rica 1, U.S.A. 0: Days After Emotional Loss, a Lackluster One Image Tim Howard, back in goal after a yearlong sabbatical, could not stop Joel Campbell’s second-half goal, which gave Costa Rica a 1-0 win. Credit Julio Cortez/Associated Press By  Andrew Das Oct. 13, 2015 HARRISON, N.J. — The stadium had been rented, the TV time had been reserved, and the tickets — some of them, at least — had been sold, so the United States went ahead and played its friendly against Costa Rica on Tuesday night. But one got the feeling that skipping it would have been just fine for everyone involved. Three days after an emotional loss to Mexico drained the team’s energy and brought down a hail of criticism on Coach Jurgen Klinsmann and his players, the Americans pushed their way through an uninspired exhibition at a less-than-half-full Red Bull Arena. That they lost the match, 1-0, did not brighten the mood of the team or the announced crowd of 9,214. “It’s not as easy as it looks out there, man,” striker Jozy Altidore said. “Right now, we’re going through a rough patch.” The loss is sure to increase the pressure on Klinsmann , the coach of the United States men since 2011. The Americans have lost five of their last six games, including embarrassing defeats against Panama and Jamaica in the Gold Cup; the Concacaf Cup loss to Mexico over the weekend; and a humbling loss in a friendly against Brazil. On Tuesday, the Americans were shut out for the first time since a loss to Germany at the 2014 World Cup and blanked at home for the first time in nearly three years . Klinsmann, however, dismissed questions — again — about whether the recent defeats should cost him his job. He seemed confident, completely at ease — again — smiling through his news conference after the game and contending that the sky was not, in fact, falling. “There are not only sunny days,” Klinsmann said. “We’ve had a lot of sunshine — 2012, 2013, 2014. Now it’s raining a little bit.” U.S. Soccer’s president, Sunil Gulati, attended Tuesday’s match and would say only that he and Klinsmann had spoken since Saturday’s loss. The Americans are not set to gather again until November, when they open the 2018 World Cup qualifying cycle with matches against St. Vincent and the Grenadines and Trinidad and Tobago. “It’s not part of my character to give up just because we’ve had a couple of bad results,” Klinsmann said. “That sits in your stomach. That drives you even more.” But, he added, “I’m not only the coach in good times; I’m here also to take the team through tough times.” That is what they are. Tuesday was just the latest in a string of frustrating results, starting with an early exit from the Concacaf Gold Cup over the summer and extending to Saturday’s defeat to Mexico at the Rose Bowl, when the Americans absorbed nearly two hours of pressure only to surrender the winning goal minutes from the end. Klinsmann’s lineup had a thrown-together feel. He had released eight players from camp on Sunday and a ninth, Fabian Johnson, on Monday after scolding him about asking to be taken out of the Mexico loss. In came five new faces, but there was little cohesion on display. Any hopes for a more attacking mind-set disappeared with the announcement that Jermaine Jones and Danny Williams, neither of whom is known as particularly creative, would start in central midfield. Altidore and Gyasi Zardes started up front, as they did Saturday, but were again ineffective. The rest of the lineup seemed disconnected. Defenders Geoff Cameron and Brad Evans, the right side of the back line, exchanged angry words after several early miscommunications. Then Jones shouted at Evans after an Evans mistake led to a scrambling tackle — and a yellow card — for Jones. The mood in the half-filled stands was not much better. Klinsmann was booed during pregame introductions, and Brek Shea got the same treatment when he sent a free kick a dozen rows into the stands in the third minute. Zardes heard it after losing the ball over the end line, and Cameron did as well after sending a first-half header directly out of bounds. Everyone got a run — Klinsmann used all six of his substitutes in the second half — but only the Costa Rican players and fans seemed to have any fun, cheering a Joel Campbell goal in the 70th minute and a shutout by goalkeeper Keylor Navas, who had carried the Ticos to the World Cup quarterfinals in Brazil last year. The Americans could only lick their wounds and look ahead to a future that some hope includes a coaching change. “We support him 100 percent,” goalkeeper Tim Howard, who was making his first appearance since ending a yearlong sabbatical, said of Klinsmann. “He’s a big boy, and we’re big boys. We’ll get it right.” U.S. STILL IN CONTENTION Marc Pelosi and Jordan Kiesewetter scored second-half goals, and the United States’ under-23 team beat Canada, 2-0, in Sandy, Utah, to stay alive in Concacaf qualifying for the Olympics next year. With the victory in the third-place game, the Americans advanced to a playoff match against Colombia. (AP) NETHERLANDS FALLS The Netherlands squandered its last chance of reaching the playoffs for next year’s European Championship with a humiliating 3-2 home loss to the 10-man Czech Republic. Its Group A rival Turkey beat visiting Iceland, 1-0, to take an automatic qualifying place as the best third-place finisher. The Dutch will miss the European Championship for the first time since 1984. Kevin De Bruyne and Dries Mertens each scored a goal and provided an assist to help Belgium secure the top spot in Group B and first place in the FIFA rankings with a 3-1 home victory over Israel. With a 1-0 win at Malta and some help from Italy, which beat Norway by 2-1, Croatia qualified for its fourth consecutive European Championship, claiming second place in Group H. (AP) A version of this article appears in print on , on Page B 12 of the New York edition with the headline: Days After Emotional U.S. Loss, a Lackluster One . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Related Coverage United States vs. Costa Rica Player Ratings Oct. 14, 2015 Image Mexico 3, U.S.A. 2: Concacaf Cup Recap Image Jurgen Klinsmann Sees U.S. Loss to Mexico as Minor Bump Oct. 11, 2015 Image Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              