   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Soccer Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Famous for Hot Moment, Zinedine Zidane is Cool as a Coach Image Real Madrid Coach Zinedine Zidane during a home game against Sevilla on March 20. He started coaching the club in January. Credit Pierre-Philippe Marcou/Agence France-Presse — Getty Images By  The Associated Press April 16, 2016 MADRID — The hot-tempered playmaker for France is gone. The levelheaded leader of Real Madrid is back. The Zinedine Zidane who took over Real’s coaching job this year looks more like the serene midfielder who enchanted with his talent than the out-of-control player who head-butted his rival in a World Cup final. After taking over a club in crisis, Zidane maintained his cool through good and bad, finding a way to keep Real’s season alive and getting off to a good start in his first major challenge as a manager. A season that appeared lost not long ago enters its final stretch with Real Madrid in contention for titles in the Champions League and the Spanish league. Zidane’s team is in the semifinals of the European tournament and within 4 points of Barcelona with six rounds left in the domestic championship. “I’m happy with how things are going,” Zidane, 43, said. “But I’m not naïve. I know that there will be difficult moments. There have been some already, and one needs to know how to approach them. I’m continuing to learn and move forward.” There have been no signs of the Zidane who lost his calm in the final of the 2006 World Cup against Italy, slamming his head into the chest of defender Marco Materazzi in an outburst that shocked the soccer world. Zidane the coach, sporting his fancy suits on the sidelines of Santiago Bernabéu Stadium, is nothing like the player who could not control his emotions during the final in Berlin. Always speaking calmly and with a low tone of voice, Zidane looks shy at times. He keeps his composure no matter the occasion, whether it is talking to his players from the bench or answering tough questions from the news media. He will display a sly smile here and there and can be a bit more vivid when celebrating an important goal from the sidelines. Using the experience of a successful playing career, his message has reverberated with players and brought harmony back to a locker room filled with big egos. “As a coach, it’s much more difficult,” Zidane said. “But I’m happy. I’m not worried about what is yet to happen. I’m focused on going day by day.” He added, referring to Real’s loss to Wolfsburg in the Champions League quarterfinal before winning, 3-2, on aggregate on Tuesday: “There are difficult moments, like the first leg, but you have to stay calm. There’s no need to drive yourself crazy. It’s all part of football.” Zidane said the 3-0 home win over Wolfsburg had been his best moment as a coach so far. Madrid had lost, 2-0, in Germany and was on the verge of a stunning elimination that could have ignited another crisis and put his command in doubt. “It was my best game as a coach,” he said. “I never let things get to my head when I played, and I will not let them get to my head as a coach, either.” One of Madrid’s greatest idols as a player, Zidane became the coach after Rafael Benítez was fired in January after a series of poor performances, including a demoralizing 4-0 home loss to Barcelona. Zidane also lost to a Spanish rival at home — 1-0 to Atlético Madrid — but his overall record after 18 games in his first major head-coaching job has been solid: 14 wins, two draws and two losses. Among his triumphs was a 2-1 victory over Barcelona at Camp Nou. Zidane, the son of Algerian immigrants, was an assistant to Carlo Ancelotti when Madrid won its 10th Champions League title in 2014. He had been coaching Real’s B team in the Spanish third division before replacing Benítez. As a player, he helped Real win the 2002 Champions League with a memorable goal in the final, and he led France to the World Cup title in 1998 and the European Championship title in 2000. He was named the world’s best player three times. Zidane stopped playing after the stunning head-butting incident in the World Cup, an outburst that will mark his career forever. Things have started differently in his coaching days. For one, he uses his head more wisely. The impulsive playmaker has given way to the cool coach. “I like what I do,” Zidane said. “That’s the most important thing.” Related Coverage Madrid Gets City, Atlético Faces Bayern, in Champions League Semifinals April 15, 2016 Image Atlético Madrid Eliminates Barcelona in Champions League April 13, 2016 Image Lawyers in FIFA Corruption Case Argue Over Possible Trial Date April 13, 2016 Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              