   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Soccer Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by On Soccer Applause at the Draw, but Will Russia Keep Cheering? Image The former Russian player Nikita Simonyan pulled out Russia’s name first — the host’s slot is always preordained — to begin the World Cup draw on Friday. Russia, the lowest-ranked team in the field according to FIFA, emerged in a favorable group: with Uruguay, Egypt and Saudi Arabia. Credit Grigory Dukor/Reuters By  Rory Smith Dec. 1, 2017 MOSCOW — Half a million fans — by current, suspiciously optimistic, estimates — will descend on Russia next year for what Gianni Infantino, the FIFA president, has already decreed will be the “best” World Cup in history. Every single fan, he has decided, will have “an amazing experience.” Billions of dollars have been spent on new, or renovated, stadiums to host the finest players in the world: Cristiano Ronaldo and Lionel Messi, Neymar and Kylian Mbappé. Russia’s president, Vladimir Putin, on Friday promised a “major sporting festival of friendship and fair play.” And now, at last, we know how it will all kick off. This great celebration of soccer, this era-defining event, the most watched sporting event in the world, will get underway at Moscow’s Luzhniki Stadium on June 14, with the almost elemental collision of the 63rd- and 65th-best teams the planet can offer. Applause rippled across the floor of the hall at the Kremlin State Palace when it was confirmed that Saudi Arabia — officially the weakest of all the teams who had to qualify for next year’s World Cup, according to FIFA’s rankings — would face Russia, officially the weakest of all the teams in next year’s World Cup, in the tournament’s opening game. Image Russian President Vladimir Putin wth the World Cup legends Diego Maradona, right, and Pele. Credit Alexey Nikolsky/Agence France-Presse — Getty Images It might have been relief from the locals in the crowd, of course: there has been no little concern here that Russia’s team is so poor that it might do what the revelations of the ongoing FIFA corruption trial in New York and the allegations of widespread state-sponsored doping could not: make Putin regret bringing the World Cup here in the first place. Still, the applause felt odd, misplaced. By almost any measure, Russia-Saudi Arabia is an anticlimax of an opening game: the weakest, in terms of the rankings of the two teams, in World Cup history. It is not the sort of game that lived up to the absurd, gaudy pomp of the ceremony that preceded it, complete with a traditional Russian dance troupe. But it is fitting, given how the rest of the draw panned out. For the first time, FIFA had changed the way the World Cup groups were drawn, pooling teams according to their ranking, rather than on a geographical basis. The move’s main effect was to protect most of the tournament favorites from meeting one another. Indeed, only in two groups are notional heavyweights drawn together: Spain meets Portugal in Group B, while Belgium encounters England in Group G. The prospect of drama in either group, though, was quelled when the identities of their other opponents were revealed. Spain and Portugal will expect to get past Morocco and Iran; England and Belgium should be too strong for Tunisia and Panama, a World Cup debutante. In the head-to-head games, nobody should suffer a knockout blow. France, Brazil and Germany did even better. It is a convention among athletes and coaches alike that you never risk belittling an opponent — pretty much every coach who faced the news media after the draw uttered some variation on the phrase “there is no such thing as an easy game” — but for those three, in particular, it must have been tempting to break it. Image Friday's World Cup draw drew up welcoming paths for several of the tournament favorites. Credit Yuri Kochetkov/European Pressphoto Agency All three have precisely the sorts of groups that they would have drawn for themselves: Peru, Australia and Denmark for the French; Serbia, Switzerland and Costa Rica for Brazil; Mexico, Sweden and South Korea in with the reigning champion, Germany. Of all the top seeds, in fact, only Argentina had cause to leave Moscow a little dispirited. Jorge Sampaoli’s team stuttered through qualifying, its fearsome attack blunted surprisingly — and troublingly — easily until Lionel Messi conjured a hat trick in Ecuador to ensure his country would go to Russia. Still, its fragile confidence could have done without the prospect of Croatia, Nigeria and Iceland lurking in Group D. That such a lineup could constitute the toughest of all the groups is indicative of the other major change — one not effected, at least directly by FIFA — that influenced the way the draw played out. Qualifying for this tournament proved, decisively, that there has been a shift in the nature of international soccer. Italy, the Netherlands, Chile and the United States are not here; Iceland, Peru and Panama are. Major nations can no longer coast into the World Cup. Smaller countries, with a decent crop of players, a gifted coach, and a sense of purpose, can overturn the odds. The change has made for some wonderful stories over the last two years, but this was its flip side: a tournament short on groups of death and seismic encounters between superpowers. As Gareth Southgate, the England manager, rightly said, it is when the draw is over that “everything comes alive.” It is when fans start to map out where their team will go, and whom it might face in the knockout rounds, when a black-and-white tournament is flooded with color. This is a little different. The 2018 World Cup has the look of a slow-burner. The first two weeks will be intriguing, rather than explosive; some of the lesser lights will have a moment to shine. Only in the latter stages will the fireworks start. FIFA is unlikely to object to a tournament that, if things go to form, could throw up quarterfinals between Portugal and France, Brazil and England, Spain and Argentina and Germany and Colombia. It is an approach with just one attendant danger. All tournaments hinge on how the host country copes when its team is eliminated. If it loses interest, the event itself can lose some of its fizz. That is a particular risk with Russia, where official support for the World Cup is rooted in a desire to project national pride, and power, to the world. If that wanes, the electricity of the tournament might go with it. “Russia is warm and welcoming,” Infantino said. “Everyone will be able to celebrate football with the Russian people.” The question, apart from what “everyone” means, is how long that will last. So perhaps the applause that greeted confirmation of the opening game was not from the Russians, but from FIFA. Russia is in a group with Saudi Arabia, Egypt and Uruguay. Not a cakewalk, by any means, but not a Calvary, either. Enough, certainly, to reassure the host that it will not be thrown out of its own party too early. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page D 1 of the New York edition with the headline: As the Curtain Rises, the Spotlight Is on Russia . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Related Coverage World Cup Draw: Group-by-Group Analysis Dec. 1, 2017 Image 2018 World Cup: 32 Teams, 1 Goal Nov. 30, 2017 Image At World Cup Draw, Doping Questions Shadow Mutko, and Russia Dec. 1, 2017 Image Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              