   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Politics Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Did James Comey Subtweet Michael Flynn? Perhaps. Image James B. Comey during a Senate Judiciary Committee hearing earlier this year. Credit Gabriella Demczuk for The New York Times By  Niraj Chokshi Dec. 1, 2017 Not long after the president’s former national security adviser, Michael T. Flynn, pleaded guilty on Friday to lying to the F.B.I., the man who was leading the agency when the lie was told, James B. Comey, had something to tweet. In what has become an occasional habit, Mr. Comey offered what appeared to be a quotation of relevance to the day’s unfolding news, in this case a biblical verse about justice. “But justice roll down like waters and righteousness like an ever-flowing stream” Amos 5:24 https://t.co/o89PSY1YBd — James Comey (@Comey) December 1, 2017  The tweet appeared to quote the New American Standard Bible and included a link to the only post on Mr. Comey’s Instagram account. That post showed the quotation alongside a photo of a rushing river cutting across a craggy landscape, an image he has shared before on Twitter. “I included the picture of the Great Falls of the Potomac because I like it and because it reminds me of my favorite scripture verse, from Amos,” he wrote at the time , including the same quotation he posted on Friday. Both of the social media accounts make reference to Mr. Comey’s much-anticipated book about his time in government, “A Higher Loyalty: Truth, Lies, and Leadership,” which is slated to come out in the spring. Mr. Comey was the F.B.I. director from 2013 to May 2017, when he was fired by President Trump. The early afternoon tweet and Instagram post came after Mr. Flynn pleaded guilty on Friday to lying to Mr. Comey’s F.B.I. about conversations he had with the Russian ambassador last December. In doing so, Mr. Flynn brought the special counsel investigation into Russian interference during the election into Mr. Trump’s inner circle. Mr. Comey’s post reflects a habit on display in recent months in which he has appeared to use a carefully chosen quotation to allude to someone or something in the news. Of course, all subtweets — the term of Twitter art for critical tweets with unnamed targets — have deniability. Mr. Comey could not be immediately reached to deny (or confirm) that he was subtweeting Mr. Flynn. He gave no further clue on Twitter. On Oct. 30, the day the special counsel filed the first charges in its investigation, Mr. Comey tweeted a quotation about democracy and justice by Reinhold Niebuhr, the American theologian who was the focus of his college thesis. (Mr. Comey had used the theologian’s name as a pseudonym on the Twitter account until recently.) A few weeks later, on Nov. 19, Mr. Comey tweeted a quotation about leadership just hours after Mr. Trump suggested that he should have left an American college basketball player in Chinese prison, a response to the athlete’s father suggesting that Mr. Trump played little role in freeing his son in the first place. On Nov. 25, Mr. Trump criticized CNN and praised Fox News on Twitter. Less than one hour later, Mr. Comey tweeted about the freedom of the press . But Mr. Comey’s tweets are not exclusively quotations. About two hours after he tweeted the Bible verse, he weighed in on a different subject in the news, sharing a “Saturday Night Live” video clip about sexual harassment. “With four daughters, this skit is funny, painful, and personal for me,” he wrote. “All of us are responsible for the culture of our workplaces, which we protect by insisting on transparency and integrity.” Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              