   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Obituaries Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Looking Back: Those We Lost in 2014 Image Lauren Bacall Credit Warner Brothers By  William McDonald Dec. 30, 2014 The deaths that tend to endure in the public memory are the ones that shock. We react to them as if they were wholly unwarranted assaults on the natural order of things. People will say: He was too young. She was in her prime. It isn’t fair. The year now ending produced more than its share of such deaths, stunning the country if not the world. One was that of Robin Williams , 63, whose madcap, quicksilver comedy, resurrected in video-clip tributes, may have drowned out in our memories the more sensitive lines he delivered as an often underappreciated actor. Another was that of the actor Philip Seymour Hoffman , 46, whose performances were not just acclaimed but something of an event — must-see brilliance in action. A depressed Mr. Williams died by his own hand; a drug-afflicted Mr. Hoffman succumbed to his own excesses. Even more searing were the deaths in which video captured dying moments in deeply disturbing fashion and lifted into the public consciousness names that most of us had never heard of. There was Eric Garner , accused of selling loose cigarettes, whose death as a result of a police officer’s viselike grip made him an emblem of a cause and his last words of distress its rallying cry. And there were the young men — journalists and humanitarians — who became tools of a most barbaric propaganda campaign , trotted out before a camera somewhere in Syria and beheaded, the hooded executioner both playing to the camera and hiding from it. Here shock came with revulsion, and one did not need to watch the deaths of James Foley, Steven Sotloff, Peter Kassig or David Haines to feel it. In far more cases, however, we learned of deaths with far more acceptance, as the unavoidable price of mortality that no one can finally bargain down. Yet even in that forbearance there was a gathering sense that each death was like the tick of a clock marking the passing of an era. Whether through elections or coups, the world stage tends to send its performers off to the wings and out of sight long before they die. But the news of their deaths reminds us of the traces they left. So it was with Ariel Sharon , who put a formidable stamp on Israel in war and peace. Comatose for years, he appeared to have left the land he loved in mind long before he did in body. The deaths of Gen. Wojciech Jaruzelski of Poland and Eduard Shevardnadze of Georgia summoned bleak images of the Cold War; that of Ian Paisley , the bloody “Troubles” and reconciliation in Northern Ireland; that of Jean-Claude Duvalier , repression in Haiti, where his nickname, Baby Doc, belied his brutality. In the United States, the deaths of political figures may have evoked distant campaigns and long-spent struggles. Some harked back to a more collegial era on Capitol Hill, when Senator Howard H. Baker Jr. , Republican of Tennessee, would join forces with a colleague like Alan J. Dixon , an Illinois Democrat known as Al the Pal, or Jim Jeffords of Vermont, a Republican turned independent. All three died in 2014. Former mayors also left the scene: Thomas M. Menino , who rolled up his sleeves to revive Boston and won its affection; Jane Byrne , who shattered the glass ceiling of Chicago’s old-boy machine politics; and Marion S. Barry Jr. , who alternately inspired, perplexed and scandalized his Washington constituents. New York City recalled a bygone political era of its own with the deaths of Basil A. Paterson , Roy M. Goodman and Herman Badillo . And the art of politics itself lost two of its ablest practitioners, the Washington dealmaker Robert S. Strauss and the media maestro David Garth , who could sell a candidate better than almost anyone, taking a page — in spirit, at least — from the best seller “The Selling of the President 1968” by Joe McGinniss , who also died this year. Others had entered the public arena from other directions. James S. Brady , a former White House aide, devoted his last decades to the cause of controlling guns, like the one that had left him partly paralyzed in 1981, shot alongside the president he served, Ronald Reagan. Joan Mondale joined the Washington scene as the wife of a senator and vice president and used her influence to promote the arts. Lawrence E. Walsh , a former judge and establishment lawyer, exposed the lawbreaking in the Reagan White House that became known as the Iran-contra scandal. James S. Schlesinger , an economist, left Harvard to serve three presidents, as defense secretary under Richard M. Nixon and Gerald R. Ford and as energy secretary under Jimmy Carter. And Charles H. Keating Jr. , a real estate tycoon and banker, came to personify the devastating savings-and-loan scandal that fleeced thousands of depositors of billions in the 1980s. In the worlds of entertainment, the obituaries (including those of Mr. Williams and Mr. Hoffman) spoke of golden ages, fertile decades, wild and crazy times and the occasional dreadful low moment. Sometimes the name alone in the headline — Lauren Bacall , Mickey Rooney , Shirley Temple Black — was enough to evoke entire chapters of film history (or, in the case of Sid Caesar , television history). Others called to mind movie palace marquees of yesteryear: Eli Wallach , Maximilian Schell , Luise Rainer and James Garner, a wry leading man who moved fluidly between the wide screen and the tube for decades. Some luminaries had shone behind the camera, familiar by their cinematic signatures: Alain Resnais , the Left Bank experimentalist; Paul Mazursky , an American iconoclast who satirized the mores of the 1960s and ’70s; and Gordon Willis , the cinematographer who created indelible imagery for such classics as “The Godfather,” “Annie Hall” and “All the President’s Men.” Notable Deaths of 2014 Remembering Maya Angelou, Philip Seymour Hoffman, Shirley Temple Black, Nadine Gordimer, Ruby Dee, Howard Baker, Elaine Stritch, Mickey Rooney, Robin Williams and others who died this year. April 9, 2014 And let us not forget the quietly accomplished Richard Attenborough , on either side of the camera, whether directing “Gandhi” or acting — with Mr. Garner — in “The Great Escape.” Hollywood mourned as well the death of its sometime resident genius Mike Nichols , as did Broadway, to which he often absconded to direct (or was it the other way around?). Broadway also dimmed its lights for a pride of lionesses: Ruby Dee , whose passion for acting was matched only by her devotion to racial justice; Marian Seldes , the regal interpreter of Edward Albee; and the irrepressible Elaine Stritch , whose name shouted showbiz. We said goodbye to personalities who were called fixtures for a reason: They lasted, outlasted, and kept on working. One was Don Pardo , whose bassoon of a voice was just goofy enough to be the perfect one to introduce the comedic revolutionaries of “Saturday Night Live,” one of whom, Jan Hooks , died less than two months after he did. Another mainstay was Joan Rivers , a loud, tart first lady of stand-up comedy, who skewered her own foibles and everyone else’s before making herself ubiquitous on talk shows and Oscar-night red carpets. She died in a case of, at the very least, medical misfortune, her last days having turned into a news media vigil as the television cameras she knew so well lingered below her hospital window. She was 81, but a still-energetic 81, and to her many fans that was far too young. The classical music world saw pillars fall: the conductors Lorin Maazel , Claudio Abbado , Christopher Hogwood and Julius Rudel ; the opera stars Carlo Bergonzi and Licia Albanese ; the visionary opera impresario Gerard Mortier . Most of them were well on in years. But longevity has hardly been a given in music’s pop universe. Yes, Pete Seeger lived to 94, and the crooner Jerry Vale , 83, the D.J. Casey Kasem , 82, and the jazz pianist Horace Silver , 85, had long runs, too. But other stars, whose music had touched a no longer young generation, did not make it far into their 70s, if they reached that milestone at all. The rock hero Jack Bruce was 71; the blues guitarist Johnny Winter , 70; the raspy rock singer Joe Cocker , 70; the soul singer Bobby Womack , 70; the singer-songwriter Jesse Winchester , 69; the punk star Tommy Ramone , 65. The world of letters — no, the world — will be vastly poorer without Gabriel García Márquez , whose masterpieces were rooted in Latin America but universal in reach, or Nadine Gordimer , a white South African who wielded fiction to lay bare the all-too-real sins of apartheid. Both were Nobel laureates, and if prizes are a yardstick of literary achievement, then they were joined in death by a veritable legion of the laureled. Among them were the poets Galway Kinnell , Maya Angelou , Amiri Baraka , Maxine Kumin and Mark Strand ; the short-story writer Mavis Gallant ; the novelists Peter Matthiessen , Thomas Berger and P. D. James , the English queen of mysteries; and the historian James MacGregor Burns . Another roster of notables performed their feats on fields and courts, in rings and arenas, often before entering halls of fame, as Ralph Kiner did. An entire generation may have known him as the amiable voice of the Mets, but longer memories knew him for what he had been: one of baseball’s great unsung sluggers. Something similar could be said of Earl Morrall , a patron saint of second-fiddles, who as a late-career backup quarterback took two different teams to the Super Bowl. Rubin (Hurricane) Carter , too, was vindicated, but at a far higher cost: A ferocious fighter between the ropes, he was even fiercer behind bars, successfully crusading to overturn his murder convictions and becoming a cause célèbre. But it took 19 years. There were few better hitters, and few better students of hitting, than Tony Gwynn . There were few skaters in hockey who combined power and finesse as spectacularly as Jean Béliveau . No one personified soccer versatility more than Alfredo Di Stefano , the Argentine “Blond Arrow” who made his name in Spain. But few athletes knew such bittersweet glory as Alice Coachman . The first black woman to win an Olympic gold medal, in the high jump in 1948, she returned to a segregated South, where at a hometown celebration in Albany, Ga. — blacks on one side of the auditorium, whites on the other — the white mayor refused to shake her hand, and she had to leave by a side door. No field of endeavor was spared in 2014. We’ve seen the last of Massimo Vignelli ’s spare, startling designs; Jane Freilicher ’s luminously original landscapes; Arthur Leipzig ’s artful photographs of New York life. The Nobel laureate Gary S. Becker will offer no further guidance on the economy; Clyde Snow , no further forensic sleuthing. Stephanie Kwolek invented Kevlar, saved an untold number of lives, and is gone. So are Willy Burgdorfer , who identified the cause of Lyme disease; Alexander Grothendieck , possibly the greatest and certainly the most enigmatic mathematician of the 20th century; Oscar de la Renta , couturier to the rich and famous and no less a celebrity himself; Nelson Bunker Hunt , who built a fortune with oil and lost it with silver; and Ben Bradlee and Arthur Gelb , whose principled passion for journalism and uncontainable personalities helped shape a newspaper era. One could suppose that all these deaths, and more, would have been of scholarly interest to the surgeon and award-winning author Sherwin B. Nuland , whose cleareyed ideas on dying stoked a wide and frank conversation about end-of-life decisions. He sought to demythologize death, to debunk romantic notions of dying with dignity, to acknowledge death’s messiness. But he also sought to make death less frightening, so that it might be faced with greater understanding, with more realistic expectations and with more courage. In the end, he, like the obituaries we read, focused less on death than on what came before it. “If the classic image of dying with dignity must be modified or even discarded,” he wrote, “what is to be salvaged of our hope for the final memories we leave to those who love us? The dignity we seek in dying must be found in the dignity with which we have lived our lives.” Dr. Nuland died in March. William McDonald is the obituaries editor of The Times.  A version of this article appears in print on , on Page B 8 of the New York edition with the headline: Looking Back: Those We Lost in 2014 . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Related Coverage The Lives They Lived Dec. 23, 2014 Image Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              