   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Sports Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Award Steeped in Tradition Meets the Modern Age Image Arnold Tucker, an Army football player, was the 1946 Sullivan award winner. Credit Associated Press By  Victor Mather April 10, 2017 The headlines can be found in prominent places in the sports sections of the ‘30s, ‘40s and ‘50s: Berlinger Winner of Sullivan Award Tucker Annexes Sullivan Award Ashenfelter Chosen for the Sullivan Trophy The days of Barney Berlinger, a Penn track star; Arnold Tucker, an Army football player; and Horace Ashenfelter, a steeplechaser, dominating the sports world are long over. And the Sullivan award for the nation’s best amateur athlete is no longer “stop the presses” news. The clubby, and sometimes restrictive, world of amateur sports has long been overshadowed by more freewheeling and profitable professional games. But the Sullivan award is still around. It will be presented Tuesday night at the New York Athletic Club, itself a location that feels to be from an earlier age. Over the years since it was first given to the golfer Bobby Jones in 1930, the Sullivan has honored a wide range of athletes including many mostly forgotten ( Bill Bonthron , anyone?). But big names and future stars also picked up the prize on occasion (Bill Bradley, 1965; Mark Spitz, 1971; Peyton Manning, 1997). The Sullivan has been presented to the brother of a princess (rower John B. Kelly Jr.) and the future stepparent of the Kardashians (Caitlyn Jenner, 1976). But at a time when well-compensated pros like Serena Williams and Kevin Durant are Olympians, the award, with its celebration of amateur ideals and high-minded praise of sportsmanship, has butted against the changing definition of “amateur.” “We’re kind of struggling with it,” said Roger J. Goudy, the president of the Amateur Athletic Union , which presents the prize formally known as the A.A.U. James E. Sullivan Award. “It is not a simple today as it was 30 or 40 years ago.” The A.A.U. has decided to leave the decisions on who is an amateur to the individual sports federations. The upshot is that college athletes are still a prime source of candidates, as are younger Olympians who are still seeking college eligibility or have not yet become heavily compensated for their abilities. Michael Phelps, for example, won for 2003, before he had earned a single Olympic gold medal or sold a single box of cereal. The eclectic mix of winners continues to include both well-known stars and little-known but still accomplished athletes. The college football superstar Tim Tebow was the 2007 recipient, and he was followed by the Olympic gymnastics gold medalist Shawn Johnson. But the next winner was the less-known disabled ultramarathoner Amy Palmeiro-Winters. The Sullivan is also a rare award in which women and men compete against one another. Women were approximately once-a-decade winners beginning in 1944 with the swimmer Ann Curtis. (In its article about her historic win, The New York Times demurely referred to her as “Miss Curtis” and called swimmers “natators.”) But the pace accelerated in the 1980s, and women achieved near equality. Last year finished in a first-ever tie, between Breanna Stewart of UConn basketball and the record-breaking Navy wide receiver Keenan Reynolds. Image Kayla Harrison, an Olympic gold medalist in judo, is a finalist for the Sullivan award. Credit James Hill for The New York Times This year’s finalists were heavily influenced by the Rio Olympic Games. But Carmelo Anthony is not among them. Rather, athletes who competed in events that were televised less often got the nod, including gold medalists Kayla Harrison , judo; Ashleigh Johnson, water polo; Ginny Thrasher , shooting; and Kyle Snyder, wrestling. Two members of the Olympic gymnastics team, Laurie Hernandez and Aly Raisman, are also in the running, as is Wisconsin volleyball player Lauren Carlini. The winner is chosen by a combination of the votes of news media members, former winners and A.A.U. officials. Also factored in is the result of a public vote online, surely not a major component when Don Budge or Dick Button picked up the prize. The A.A.U. is trying to keep the award relevant amid a rapidly changing sports landscape. “Thirty years ago, who would have thought cheerleading was a sport,” Goudy said. “Kids today are doing different things. We’re trying to roll with that.” He mentioned that he recently had a meeting about pickleball. Image Sammy Lee, with his mother, Eunkee, as he accepted the Sullivan award from Louis Wilke in 1954. Credit John Lent/Associated Press The A.A.U. is trying to get with the times in another way. In the early days, the Sullivan was largely awarded to white athletes from places like the Ivy League. The Korean-American diver Sammy Lee won for 1953, and the next year the Sullivan Award was presented for the first time to a black athlete, runner Mal Whitfield, more than 20 years after it began. “We have overlooked people,” Goudy acknowledged. Jesse Owens went to Berlin and won four Olympic gold medals in 1936. He did not win the Sullivan, which went to his white teammate Glenn Morris in a close vote, 1,106 to 1,013. Owens had been the overwhelming winner of The Associated Press poll for the best athlete of the year, amateur or professional. The A.P. reported at the time of the Sullivan upset: “Some observers believed Morris’s victory over Owens was influenced, in part at least, by the fact that the Negro flash turned professional after the Olympic Games and engaged in several disputes, at long and short range, with A.A.U. officials.” The Times noted that Owens had been left off one ballot entirely. But the A.A.U. has added a new award this year, for lifetime achievement. Owens will be the first recipient. Maybe soon the Sullivan will go to a skateboarder, snowboarder or pickleball player. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page B 15 of the New York edition with the headline: Amateur Ideal Survives in Age of the Professional . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              