   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Television Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by The Summer TV Lineup: 13 Series to Watch Image A scene from “Glow,” arriving June 23 on Netflix. Credit Erica Parise/Netflix By  Mike Hale May 25, 2017 Summer television has improved more than that of any other season, but it’s still a time for escapist pleasures — they’re just smarter and better made than they used to be. Here are 13 choices for summer fun (on American television or streaming services) that won’t starve your brain of oxygen. All premiere dates are subject to change. The Jim Jefferies Show Season 1, Comedy Central, June 6 The Australian comedian Jim Jefferies takes on John Oliver and Samantha Bee on their own turf, the weekly, topical, host-centric late-night (10:30 p.m.) show. Mr. Jefferies probably got the gig on the strength of his popular gun-control routine and his caustic exchange with Piers Morgan about Donald J. Trump, but for the full range of his talent check out his tenderly abrasive 2013-14 sitcom, “Legit.” Claws Season 1, TNT, June 11 The increasingly crowded category of the quirky Southern crime drama with a dark-comic edge — Elmore Leonard - Carl Hiaasen country — adds this series that was originally in the works at HBO. Niecy Nash, Carrie Preston and Judy Reyes star as Florida manicurists who do a little money laundering on the side. Glow Season 1, Netflix, June 23 Period dramas about pop-culture scenes have generally come attached to men with big swinging reputations: Baz Luhrmann (“The Get Down”), Martin Scorsese and Mick Jagger (“Vinyl”), Jim Carrey (“I’m Dying Up Here”). Now we get one from a female perspective: “Glow,” a comic drama about a women’s professional wrestling circuit in the 1980s, was created by Liz Flahive and Carly Mensch, and its executive producers include Jenji Kohan of “Orange Is the New Black.” It’s refreshingly free of the bombast and fatuousness that often come with the genre and features a winning performance by Alison Brie as an actress who finds work doing chokeslams and piledrivers. Image Olivia Colman and David Tennant in “Broadchurch,” returning June 28 on BBC America. Credit Colin Hutton/BBC America Broadchurch Season 3, BBC America, June 28 There’s no “‘Broadchurch’ will return” after the closing credits this time — the show’s third season of languid seaside menace, hyper-procedural police work and squabbling-partner dramedy is by all accounts its last. Miller and Hardy (the dream team of Olivia Colman and David Tennant) are still working together three years after the turgid events of Season 2. The final eight-episode arc begins with a quiet, horrible, mesmerizing 15-minute scene of the examining and questioning of a rape victim (Julie Hesmondhalgh, who’s terrific), and over the course of the season that crime is investigated while the Broadchurch townies deal with other crises, including the decline of the town newspaper and the continuing repercussions of the death of Danny Latimer in Season 1. Gypsy Season 1, Netflix, June 30 Naomi Watts, starring in a series for the first time in 20 years, plays a therapist who tells her patients to set boundaries but has a hard time observing them herself. It’s a Diane Lane role — the dutiful wife and mom pushed into dangerous behavior by incipient middle age and marital boredom (even though her husband is played by Billy Crudup). Sam Taylor-Johnson, director of “Fifty Shades of Grey,” gives the first two episodes an erotic-thriller sheen. The Netflix full-season commitment ensures that “Gypsy” gets a longer run than Ms. Watts’s last series, “Sleepwalkers,” whose cancellation was announced by NBC after two episodes. Image Tom Everett Scott, left, plays a loyal husband in “I’m Sorry,” starting July 12 on truTV. Credit Scott Everett White/Trutv I’m Sorry Season 1, truTV, July 12 TruTV, home of “Impractical Jokers” and “Hack My Life,” isn’t necessarily where you’d expect to find an assured, biting new alt-sitcom, but here it is. The comedian’s comedian Andrea Savage created and wrote the series and stars as a neo-soccer mom — self-absorbed, abrasive and anxious to please — and the show finds the perfect use for Tom Everett Scott as her loyal but apprehensive husband. Game of Thrones Season 7, HBO, July 16 Winter comes to Westeros. The enormously popular fantasy series, meanwhile, moves to the summer for the first time. The seven-episode season bridges the gap to the show’s final run, six concluding episodes in 2018. Image Yvonne Orji, left, and Issa Rae on “Insecure,” returning to HBO on June 23. Credit Justina Mintz/HBO Insecure Season 2, HBO, July 23 Issa (Issa Rae) and Molly (Yvonne Orji) return for a second season of social and sexual anxiety among Los Angeles’s African-American bourgeoisie. Ms. Rae and Larry Wilmore’s comedy celebrates the primordial bonds of female friendship, but of course what we’re all wondering is whether Issa and the supremely passive-aggressive Lawrence (Jay Ellis) are really over . What Would Diplo Do? Season 1, Viceland, Aug. 3 Viceland’s first original scripted show is in the genre of comedies about fictionalized versions of real-life entertainers, but with a twist: The D.J. and producer Diplo is played by the actor James Van Der Beek. (Mr. Van Der Beek has experience in this area, having played himself in “Don’t Trust the B in Apartment 23.”) Diplo, sometimes referred to as Wes (full name: Thomas Wesley Pentz), is portrayed as an overgrown child, well-meaning but comically self absorbed: “You know you’re not Jesus, right?” “We won’t really know till I’m dead, right?” This portrait presumably has the blessing of the real Diplo, who serves as an executive producer. Mr. Mercedes Season 1, AT&T Audience Network, Aug. 9 Based on its first two episodes, this dramatization of the Edgar Award-winning 2014 mystery novel of the same title is the Stephen King adaptation to watch this summer. (Spike’s version of “The Mist” debuts June 22.) David E. Kelley wrote the 10-episode series about a retired detective taunted by a mass killer he couldn’t catch. It has a bit of a “Mr. Robot” vibe and an interesting cast that includes Brendan Gleeson, Holland Taylor, Breeda Wool, Kelly Lynch and Mary-Louise Parker. Harry Treadaway of “Penny Dreadful” plays the killer, replacing Anton Yelchin, who died last year before filming began. Get Shorty Season 1, Epix, Aug. 13 Davey Holmes, a writer for “In Treatment” and “Shameless,” created this 10-episode adaptation of the Elmore Leonard novel, which had already been turned into a 1995 film . The main character, a small-time Las Vegas gangster who gets embroiled in the movie business, has been renamed Miles Daley (from Chili Palmer) and, in an even greater change, will be played by the Irish comic actor Chris O’Dowd — quite a switch from the film’s John Travolta. Ray Romano takes on the Gene Hackman role of the shady producer. Marvel’s The Defenders Season 1, Netflix, Aug. 18 This one’s here sheerly on speculation — all we’ve seen is a middling trailer . The fifth Marvel-Netflix series teams the heroes of the previous four, Daredevil, Jessica Jones, Luke Cage and Iron Fist, and we have to hope it’s closer in quality to “Marvel’s Jessica Jones” than it is to “Marvel’s Iron Fist.” Episodes Season 5, Showtime, Aug. 20 Showtime’s jaundiced take on the television business returns for its final season after a more than two-year hiatus, which feels appropriate for a comedy about people making a TV show they hate. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page AR 20 of the New York edition with the headline: From Female Wrestling to Quirky Crime . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Related Coverage A Speedy Refresher Course for Your Summer TV Favorites May 25, 2017 Image In ‘Game of Thrones,’ the Pleasures of a Quickened Pace June 27, 2016 Image The Misadventures of Issa Rae Aug. 4, 2015 Image Friend or Faux: Not Quite Joey, but Not Himself July 23, 2010 Image Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              