   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Baseball Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Jeter Brings Out the Kid in a Future Opponent Image Todd Frazier is the third baseman for the Cincinnati Reds, entering his fourth season at age 28. Credit Barton Silverman/The New York Times By  Tyler Kepner Feb. 18, 2014 GOODYEAR, Ariz. — The first time Todd Frazier set foot on a major league field, he stood next to Derek Jeter. Frazier was 12. Now Frazier is the third baseman for the Cincinnati Reds, entering his fourth season at age 28. He is part of a younger generation of players who were raised on Jeter, the Yankees’ captain, who will meet with members of the news media on Wednesday in Tampa, Fla., to discuss his pending retirement. Jeter, who turns 40 in June, said last week that this would be his final season. When Frazier heard the news, he was busy dodging snowstorms as he tried to leave for spring training. Frazier still spends his winters in New Jersey, where he starred for the Toms River Little League team in 1998. Frazier went 4 for 4 with a home run in the championship game of the Little League World Series, leading Toms River to a victory over Japan. A few days later, on Sept. 1, the team took a bus to Yankee Stadium to be honored before a game against Oakland. Frazier remembers watching Matt Stairs, the Athletics slugger, launch home runs in batting practice, and then receiving Stairs’s broken bat as a souvenir. “I was just in awe,” Frazier said. “I’m like, ‘God, one day, I need one opportunity to get up here,’ and I just relished it. It was so much fun.” Before the first pitch, each Toms River player took the field with the Yankee who played the same position. Frazier was a shortstop then, so he stood beside Jeter, who was then in his third full season and about to win his second World Series. Frazier’s favorite Yankee was actually Paul O’Neill — “I liked his energy, hitting the water coolers,” Frazier said — but as he grew up, he found himself rooting for the Boston Red Sox, attracted by their colorful personalities. But he made small talk that night with Jeter, who signed Frazier’s baseball. And like so many Red Sox fans, Frazier respected Jeter. Image Todd Frazier, left, was 12 when he first met Derek Jeter. Credit my9 “I didn’t root for him, but when he did good, you couldn’t be mad at him,” Frazier said. “Not at all.” Frazier attended Rutgers and was chosen by the Reds in the first round of the 2007 draft, reaching the majors in 2011. (He wears 21, O’Neill’s number, but said it was a coincidence.) Two years ago, Frazier said, he worked out with Jeter in Florida and reminded him of their first meeting. Jeter laughed, Frazier said, and begged him not to tell anyone. He signed the photograph from 1998, which Frazier keeps in a frame at home. “The last time we played him in New York, he kind of winked at me, gave me a fake bunt because he was the first batter of the game,” Frazier said. “So he remembered. It was pretty cool how he doesn’t forget his roots or the people he gets to know.” Frazier said he admired Jeter for the way he conducted himself — “not really undercover,” Frazier said, “but kind of smooth” — and he knows that Jeter was born in New Jersey. So was Frazier, and the player Frazier said could supplant Jeter as a role model for today’s Little Leaguers. “I would say my buddy Mike Trout, honestly,” Frazier said. “I know he’s young, but he plays the game hard. He’s on his way to making a big contract. I could see him making that, but understanding, ‘I still have a lot to learn, a lot to go, and it’s not about the money, it’s about playing this game hard.’ He does that. In three or four years, as he grows as an athlete, I really see him being the face of Major League Baseball.” Trout, a Los Angeles Angels outfielder, grew up in Millville, N.J., and has listed Jeter among his childhood favorites. Like many others across baseball last week, including Bryce Harper, Hanley Ramirez and B. J. Upton, Trout saluted Jeter on Twitter after learning of his plans to retire. “Grew up watching Jeter play,” Trout wrote. “Always aspired to be the player he was on and off the field.” The Angels, the Reds and the rest of the teams on the Yankees’ schedule have one final chance to compete against Jeter. The players who grew up watching him, like Frazier, will cherish the opportunity. “I can say, ‘I know Derek Jeter,’ ” Frazier said. “That’s pretty awesome to say.” A version of this article appears in print on , on Page B 19 of the New York edition with the headline: Jeter Brings Out the Kid in a Future Opponent . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Related Coverage Beltran and Roberts Note Honor and Responsibility in Being Yankees Feb. 17, 2014 Image A Diamondbacks Outfielder Who Throws Strikes Feb. 17, 2014 Image Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              