   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Sports Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Sports Briefing Manchester United Dealt a Blow With Loss at West Ham By  The Associated Press May 11, 2016 Manchester United’s hopes of Champions League soccer took a battering on Tuesday in a 3-2 loss at West Ham that followed an attack on United’s bus as it arrived for the match. Winston Reid headed a late winner to give West Ham a victory that left United in fifth place in the standings, 2 points behind Manchester City with one round of matches to play. Objects were thrown as the bus pulled up outside the stadium for West Ham’s final game at Boleyn Ground, ahead of its move to Olympic Stadium next season. Video footage showed damage to sections of the bus’s tinted external windows, and a police officer and a member of the public were injured. Kickoff was delayed by 45 minutes. The English Football Association said in a statement that it “strongly condemns the unsavory incidents this evening involving both the Manchester United team coach outside West Ham United’s Boleyn Ground and objects thrown from a section of the home support during the game. “We will work closely with both clubs and the Metropolitan Police to fully investigate these matters.” Baseball Nationals Trade Infielder to Angels The Washington Nationals say they have traded infielder Brendan Ryan to the Los Angeles Angels for cash considerations. Ryan has been at Class AAA Syracuse this season after signing with Washington in February. The swap comes a day after the Angels said shortstop Andrelton Simmons needed surgery for a torn ligament in his left thumb. Simmons was hurt Sunday. He was batting .219 with a home run and eight R.B.I. this season. Ryan has played in parts of nine major league seasons for the Cardinals, the Mariners and the Yankees, starting games at shortstop, second base, third base and outfield. He has a .234 career batting average. ANOTHER YANKEE ON D.L. Mark Teixeira is the latest Yankee to get hurt, joining Alex Rodriguez, Jacoby Ellsbury and C. C. Sabathia. After starting the Yankees’ first 30 games this season, Teixeira was out of the starting lineup against Kansas City on Tuesday night because of neck spasms. Injury list The Miami Marlins right-hander Nefi Ogando was placed on the 15-day disabled list because of a broken rib on his right side. Ogando was hurt while covering first base Sunday when he collided with the Philadelphia Phillies hitter Cesar Hernandez. Cincinnati Reds catcher Devin Mesoraco had surgery on his left shoulder and will undergo a six-month rehabilitation program. Mesoraco started feeling pain in his nonthrowing shoulder the first week of the season. The Atlanta Braves placed the right-hander Jim Johnson on the 15-day D.L. with a right groin strain and recalled the left-hander Ian Krol from Gwinnett. COLLEGE ATHLETICS Rutgers Drive Tops $50 Million Rutgers has raised more than $50 million since the beginning of the year in an effort to build new athletic facilities and upgrade others in a bid to become more competitive in the Big Ten Conference. Athletic Director Patrick Hobbs said the university had received more than $29.3 million in cash and pledges since the fund-raising drive began after Gov. Chris Christie of New Jersey signed legislation granting $25 million in tax credits toward the building of a multisport training center — the centerpiece of the three projects in the master plan that was announced on Jan. 20. The two other projects include a lacrosse, tennis and soccer complex and enhanced football facilities at Hale Center. Prior to the current campaign, the most money Rutgers raised for athletics was $14 million in the 2014-15 fiscal year. Hockey Germany Routs Slovakia in Russia Germany beat Slovakia, 5-1, in Group B at the hockey world championship in St. Petersburg, Russia, at which the Danish defenseman Jesper Jensen was also taken to a hospital after hitting his head against the glass in a game against Switzerland. His condition was not immediately known. In Group A, Switzerland went on to beat Denmark, 3-2, in overtime. Germany’s next opponent is Canada, which scored 20 goals in its first three games of the tournament. Slovakia remained in third place despite the loss, behind Canada and Finland. The top four teams in each group advance to the playoff round. Switzerland rose to fourth in Group A, one place above Denmark. The Czech Republic leads the group ahead of Russia and Sweden. Pro Basketball Heat’s Whiteside to Miss Game 5 Hassan Whiteside of the Miami Heat will not accompany his team to Toronto for Game 5 of the Eastern Conference semifinal series on Wednesday night. The Heat flew out on Tuesday. Before departing, Heat Coach Erik Spoelstra said Whiteside would stay behind and continue to receive therapy on his injured right knee. Whiteside did not play in Game 4 on Monday. He sprained the medial collateral ligament his knee during an awkward fall in Game 3. Olympics Sochi Doping Investigation Grows The World Anti-Doping Agency will begin an investigation into newly revealed details about Russian doping at the Sochi Olympics. In a news release, agency President Craig Reedie said it was surprising to hear the new claims so long after an independent commission appointed by WADA finished its report about widespread doping on the Russian track team. In an interview with “60 Minutes” that aired Sunday, the whistle-blower Vitaly Stepanov said the former director of the suspended Moscow antidoping lab told him four Russian gold medalists at the Sochi Games had used steroids. Tennis Serena Williams Wins in Italy Serena Williams got her clay-court season off to a strong start with a 6-4, 6-3 win over 51st-ranked Anna-Lena Friedsam in the second round of the Italian Open in Rome. Having missed the Madrid Open last week because of a fever, the top-ranked Williams showed no signs of illness, sending crushing returns of serves for winners and dictating the long rallies. “I love the clay, and it just really felt good out there tonight,” Williams said. In men’s second-round action, sixth-seeded Kei Nishikori beat Viktor Troicki, 5-7, 6-2, 6-3. Cycling Dutchman Reclaims Giro Lead The Italian rider Diego Ulissi won the fourth stage of the Giro d’Italia in Praia a Mare, Italy, by attacking on a climb shortly before the finish, while the Dutchman Tom Dumoulin crossed second to reclaim the overall lead. Returning to Italy after three stages in the Netherlands, Ulissi put an Italian stamp on the race after Dumoulin took the opening time trial and Marcel Kittel of Germany won the first two sprints. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page B 10 of the New York edition with the headline: Manchester United Takes a Hit With a Loss at West Ham . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              