   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Soccer Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Champions League: Manchester United and Paris Saint-Germain Win Groups Image Manchester United players celebrated after a goal by Marcus Rashford, far right, during their win over CSKA Moscow on Tuesday. Credit Dave Thompson/Associated Press By  The Associated Press Dec. 5, 2017 Manchester United advanced to the Champions League knockout stage after rallying to beat CSKA Moscow, 2-1, on Tuesday to remain unbeaten at Old Trafford for a club record-equaling 40 successive games. Basel joined United in reaching the next phase out of Group A by downing Benfica, 2-0. Paris Saint-Germain won Group B despite losing at Bayern Munich, 3-1, the second straight loss for P.S.G., the French league leader. Roma beat Qarabag, 1-0, to top Group C ahead of Chelsea, which had already clinched a knockout-round berth. The latter was held to a 1-1 draw at home by Atlético Madrid, which was eliminated after reaching the final in two of the last four years. There could be five English teams among the last 16 for the first time if Liverpool advances on Wednesday. Last year’s runner-up, Juventus, had to wait until the last group game to qualify. Juventus won at Olympiakos, 2-0, and advanced along with Barcelona, which beat Sporting Lisbon by 2-0 and won the group. Here is a look at other Tuesday games: GROUP A Romelu Lukaku and Marcus Rashford scored in a 66-second span for United, which became the third English team to finish at the top of its group. Manchester City and Tottenham were already assured of first place heading into their final group-stage games on Wednesday. Lukaku volleyed in what was his second goal since September to tie the score in the 64th minute, and Rashford drove home an angled shot to give United the lead. Vitinho gave CSKA Moscow a 1-0 lead seconds before halftime. At Benfica, Basel forward Mohamed Elyounoussi headed in a cross from Michael Lang five minutes into the game and Dimitri Oberlin doubled the lead with another header in the 65th minute. United won the group, finishing 3 points ahead of Basel. CSKA Moscow was left with a berth in the Europa League, and Benfica completed its Champions League campaign without a point. GROUP B Paris Saint-Germain’s impressive attack improved upon its tournament record of 24 goals in the group stage, with Kylian Mbappé scoring the record 25th. But it was not enough for P.S.G., which was coming off a stunning 2-1 loss to lowly Strasbourg in the French league over the weekend. Robert Lewandowski got Bayern Munich off to a flying start and Corentin Tolisso doubled the German club’s lead before the break. Bayern needed just two more in the second half to top the group, but Mbappé dented those hopes soon after halftime when he headed home a ball sent in by Edinson Cavani. Both sides finished with 15 points, well ahead of Celtic and Anderlecht, both of which had 3. Anderlecht beat Celtic in Glasgow, 1-0, but Celtic finished third to take the Europa League place. GROUP C Diego Perotti scored early in the second half for Roma in its win against Qarabag. But more intrigue came after the final whistle, as the Chelsea-Atlético match in England still had a couple of more minutes to go. The Roma squad waited in front of their fans and, as soon as the big screen showed the other match was over, there were huge cheers from players and supporters. Demoted to the Europa League, Atlético will miss the Champions League knockout phase for the first time in five years. But even if Atlético had held onto its lead, which it secured in the 56th minute on a goal by Saúl Ñíguez, it would not have been enough to finish in the top two due to Roma’s victory. Chelsea got its equalizer in the 75th minute when defender Stefan Savic turned Eden Hazard’s shot into his own net, helping the club to finish second. Qarabag finished at the bottom of the group. GROUP D Juventus, a finalist in two of the last three seasons, secured its berth in the next phase with goals from Juan Cuadrado and Federico Bernardeschi. Cuadrado lunged forward to meet a cross from Alex Sandro and beat Olympiakos goalkeeper Silvio Proto in the 15th minute. Juventus Coach Massimiliano Allegri left striker Mario Mandzukic on the bench as he recovered from a calf injury, but the club looked comfortable playing in a low gear. Olympiakos tired toward the end of the game at Karaiskakis stadium, leaving Bernardeschi with an easy route to a goal in the 90th minute. With Lionel Messi rested by Barcelona for the first hour, forward Paco Alcácer took full advantage of the opportunity by scoring a header in the 59th. Sporting Lisbon’s Jérémy Mathieu, a former Barcelona defender, added an own goal in stoppage time. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page B 8 of the New York edition with the headline: Manchester United Advances in Champions League . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              