   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Media Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Fox News Column Mocking Olympic Team Diversity Draws Outrage Image John Moody, an executive vice president and executive editor of Fox News, in 2008. In a column this week on FoxNews.com, he sarcastically suggested that the United States Olympic Committee adopt the motto “Darker, Gayer, Different.” Credit Frederick M. Brown/Getty Images By  Michael M. Grynbaum Feb. 9, 2018 Fox News on Friday removed an incendiary op-ed article by one of its top executives, after the piece drew criticism for mocking American Olympic officials who had emphasized the diversity of this year’s team of athletes. The column suggested, sarcastically, that the United States Olympic Committee adopt a new motto: “Darker, Gayer, Different.” The piece, published on Wednesday and written by John Moody, an executive vice president and executive editor of Fox News, caused an uproar on social media. Some of the network’s employees expressed dismay that Fox News had allowed the article to be published on its website. “John Moody’s column does not reflect the views or values of Fox News and has been removed,” the network said in a statement. Mr. Moody, a Time magazine alumnus who was one of the network’s earliest senior news managers, was close to Roger E. Ailes, Fox News’s former chairman. Mr. Moody’s role at Fox News has dwindled over the years; despite his lofty title, he has little formal oversight over the channel’s day-to-day coverage. The column, however, returned Mr. Moody to the spotlight. Its headline, “In Olympics, let’s focus on the winner of the race — not the race of the winner,” prefaced a critique of American Olympic officials who had praised the diversity of the squad headed to this month’s Winter Olympics in South Korea. “No sport that we are aware of awards points — or medals — for skin color or sexual orientation,” Mr. Moody wrote. “Were our Olympians selected because they’re the best at what they do,” he added, “or because they’re the best publicity for our current obsession with having one each from Column A, B and C?” The essay was denounced by gay advocacy groups including Glaad and the Human Rights Campaign. Mr. Moody’s longevity at Fox News, which he joined in the 1990s, was cited as one reason that editors at FoxNews.com deferred to him in publishing the piece. Fox News has been on a public rehabilitation campaign since the ouster of Mr. Ailes in 2016 and, later, the channel’s longtime star anchor, Bill O’Reilly, amid a variety of claims involving harassment and intimidation. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page B 7 of the New York edition with the headline: Fox News  Scraps Article By Executive After Uproar . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              