   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Sports Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Sports Briefing Twins Collect 28 Hits on Way to 20 Runs Against Mariners By  The Associated Press June 14, 2017 Eddie Rosario hit three home runs and drove in five runs, and the Minnesota Twins set a franchise record with 28 hits while batting around in two innings of a 20-7 victory over the visiting Seattle Mariners on Tuesday night. Max Kepler and Brian Dozier also went deep, Eduardo Escobar had five hits and two R.B.I., and Jason Castro had four hits and four R.B.I. for the Twins, who are in first place in the American League Central despite an A.L.-worst 13-19 record at home. The Twins’ 28 hits were the most in a game since the Texas Rangers had 29 in a 30-3 win over the Baltimore Orioles on Aug. 22, 2007. STANTON HOMERS IN RETURN Giancarlo Stanton returned to the starting lineup after recovering from a bruised wrist and hit a two-run homer to help the Miami Marlins beat the visiting Oakland Athletics, 8-1. BLUE JAYS SELECT CLEMENS’S SON Another Rocket is headed to Toronto. The Blue Jays selected University of Texas first baseman Kacy Clemens — son of Roger — in the eighth round of the Major League Baseball draft. Clemens hit .305 for the Longhorns this season, along with a team-leading 12 home runs and 49 R.B.I. SOCCER France Overcomes Red Card in Friendly Image England goalkeeper Tom Heaton after allowing Ousmane Dembélé’s deciding goal in France’s 3-2 victory. Credit Etienne Laurent/European Pressphoto Agency Ousmane Dembélé scored the winner as France overcame a red card for Raphaël Varane early in the second half to beat visiting England, 3-2, in a pulsating exhibition in St.-Denis on Tuesday. The teenage striker Kylian Mbappé set up Dembélé’s winner in the 78th minute with an astute pass, and the two caused problems for a patchy England defense all night with their electrifying speed and skill. It threatened to be another frustrating night for France at the hands of technology, with Varane sent off two minutes into the second half. The referee Davide Massa awarded a penalty kick after Varane fouled midfielder Dele Alli; after using the video referral system, he brandished the red card. England striker Harry Kane slammed home that penalty kick, in the 48th minute. In an emotional show of support for the victims of the recent attacks in Manchester and London, the players walked out to the sound of “Don’t Look Back in Anger” from Oasis. The pop anthem was played by the musicians and the choir of the French Republican Guard. JAPAN DRAWS; SOUTH KOREA LOSES Japan and South Korea dropped points in 2018 World Cup qualification in games that both teams were expected to win. In Group B, Japan was held to a 1-1 draw by Iraq in Tehran, and in Group A, South Korea lost, 3-2, at Qatar. RONALDO ACCUSED OF TAX FRAUD A Spanish state prosecutor accused Real Madrid forward Cristiano Ronaldo of defrauding Spain’s tax office of 14.7 million euros ($16.5 million) in unpaid taxes. In a statement, Madrid’s regional state prosecutor accused Ronaldo of four accounts of tax fraud from 2011 to 2014. It said Ronaldo “took advantage of a business structure created in 2010 to hide from fiscal authorities income generated in Spain from image rights.” FORMER PLAYER TO LEAD ROMA The former Roma midfielder Eusebio Di Francesco will manage the team, the Serie A runner-up, ushering the Giallorossi into a new era after the retirement of the longtime captain Francesco Totti. Roma announced that Di Francesco had signed a two-year contract to replace Luciano Spalletti, who left to coach Inter Milan. INVESTIGATION AT MERCHANT MARINE ACADEMY The United States Merchant Marine Academy is not permitting seven members of the men’s soccer team to graduate with their class this weekend amid an investigation, a congressman said. Five of the players have filed lawsuits seeking permission to graduate, according to court documents. Documents filed on behalf of four of the players speak of alleged hazing of a freshman member of the team during a September visit to Rhode Island for a game against the United States Coast Guard Academy. Court papers involving a fifth player claim that student was not on the trip during which hazing might have occurred. Revelations involving the soccer team come as the military service academy, just outside New York City, struggles with allegations of sexual abuse, harassment and bullying. Last year, a program that places academy midshipmen on commercial vessels was temporarily suspended over concerns that students were being victimized. Representative Peter King, Republican of New York and chairman of the academy’s Board of Visitors, a congressional oversight panel, said he learned of the investigation involving the soccer team about 10 days ago. PRO FOOTBALL Patriots’ Edelman Signs Extension Julian Edelman is a step closer toward playing his entire N.F.L. career with the New England Patriots. Edelman, a 31-year-old receiver, confirmed that he had signed a contract extension that runs through the 2019 season. Although he had off-season foot surgery leading into the 2016 season, Edelman appeared in all 16 regular-season games for just the second time. He also had a team-best 98 catches and 1,106 receiving yards. REDSKINS TURN TO EX-QUARTERBACK The former Redskins quarterback Doug Williams was named Washington’s senior vice president for player personnel. Williams, 61, who has been in Washington’s front office since February 2014, got a promotion from senior personnel executive but did not want the general manager’s title. “We had a general manager — it didn’t work out that well,” Williams said, referring to the two-year tenure of Scot McCloughan, who was fired in March. JETS ADD KICKOFF RETURNER The Jets signed Jordan Todman, a running back and kick returner, to give their special teams a boost. Todman averaged 29.9 yards on kickoff returns last season for the Indianapolis Colts. BOBSLEDDING Holcomb Toxicology Report Is Released The Olympic bobsledding champion Steven Holcomb had prescription sleeping pills and alcohol in his system when he was found dead last month, according to a toxicology report provided to his family and U.S.A. Bobsled and Skeleton. Holcomb’s blood alcohol level was found to be 0.188, well above the threshold for intoxication. He also had more than the typical dosage of the sleeping aid Lunesta in his system, and the report indicated that the combination was fatal for Holcomb, who was found in his bed at the Olympic Training Center in Lake Placid, N.Y., on May 6. TENNIS Nadal to Skip Queen’s Club Tournament Coming off a French Open title, Rafael Nadal said he would miss next week’s Aegon Championships at Queen’s Club — a grass-court event in London — to rest before Wimbledon. Nadal told the Lawn Tennis Association website that he had originally planned to play. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page B 12 of the New York edition with the headline: Baseball; Twins Collect 28 Hits on the Way to 20 Runs . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              