   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index New York Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Francis in America Pope’s Visit to East Harlem School Highlights Church’s Challenges Image Former parishioners of Our Lady of Queen of Angels, which closed in 2007, praying this month in East Harlem. Credit Todd Heisler/The New York Times By  Joshua Jamerson July 24, 2015 On a recent Sunday, on park benches amid public housing projects in East Harlem, more than a dozen people sang hymns and joined hands to pray. The park did not rest for them. The sounds of children playing and dogs yipping made for an accompanying choir. The small group has met this way for several years, huddled together every Sunday through the bitterness of winter and under the scorching summer sun. They are what remain of Our Lady Queen of Angels parish, which closed in 2007 as part of a broad reorganization of the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of New York that led to the closing of dozens of churches across the New York region. Although their church on 113th Street was boarded up, a hardy band of former parishioners continued to meet every Sunday. Weeks became months; months turned into years. The Vatican announced this month that Pope Francis will visit the former parish’s school, which continues to operate around the corner and serves about 290 mostly poor immigrant children. The decision to include the school in the pope’s three-city itinerary in September, when he visits the United States for the first time, fits with Francis’ efforts to focus the church on the poor and marginalized. But it will also cast a spotlight on the challenges facing the Roman Catholic Church in New York and across the country. Our Lady Queen of Angels, which opened in 1886, used to be one of eight Catholic parishes in East Harlem. By the time the pope arrives, after another round of church consolidations this year has concluded, there will be just four. The successive overhauls of the archdiocese, spaced six years apart, were necessitated by a dwindling number of priests and declining church attendance. The changes have reshaped the archdiocese, which stretches from Staten Island to the Catskills. In East Harlem, the Catholic Church has been buffeted on several fronts. The Puerto Rican faithful, who once filled the pews, have largely left for other parts of the city. The void has been filled with Dominican and Mexican parishioners, but many have been drawn away by storefront Pentecostal churches . The departure from the Roman Catholic Church in the United States has taken place over decades, but “it’s accelerated in East Harlem recently,” said Tony Carnes, who has spent years researching churches in the city and now runs an online journal, A Journey Through NYC Religions . The Catholic parishes in East Harlem have also been struggling with another shift in the neighborhood’s demographics. “I saw great change right after 9/11,” said the Rev. Frank Skelly, formerly of St. Cecilia’s Church on East 106th Street, which remains open. Speaking of an influx of white residents, he said: “The people that moved in, I don’t remember any of them coming around registering in the parish. We didn’t see them except going to the subways in the morning and coming home at night.” Former parishioners at Our Lady Queen of Angels say that at the time of its closing, their church had been weathering the changes in the neighborhood. Membership had been holding steady at over 400, they said, and weekly attendance was healthy. Many believe the reason their church was targeted for closure was that it was not financially self-sustaining: The congregation was made up of mostly poor parishioners. Even years later, former members are bitter. “This area is very poor; there is high crime,” said Patty Rodriguez, a former parishioner who leads the sidewalk services. “This was something that we needed, like a beacon. Other churches are here, but they’re not in the middle of the projects.” Ms. Rodriguez described the church’s closing as a “betrayal.” “I don’t understand it,” she said. In the past, closing a parish typically meant its school would be closed as well, Joseph Zwilling, a spokesman for the archdiocese, said. But the archdiocese has moved to a regional educational model involving multiple parishes. “The concept is to involve all of the parishes,” he said. “Now Parish A and Parish B and Parish C and Parish D are all responsible for the school.” In the case of Queen of Angels, Mr. Zwilling said that the school’s deep ties to the community and the fact that “it’s a good school” led to the decision to keep it open. Enrollment has remained steady, he said. But the school, which runs from prekindergarten to eighth grade, has also been enduring many of the trends that have afflicted Catholic education nationwide in recent decades. With nuns increasingly replaced by laypeople as teachers, labor costs have risen. And religious schools must compete with charters, which like Catholic schools often stress discipline and character education but have the advantage of being free. (A year’s tuition and fees at Our Lady Queen of Angels today come to $4,400.) In fact, Queen of Angels is now part of a network of six Catholic schools in East Harlem and the South Bronx managed by the Partnership for Inner-City Education , which borrows much of its approach to academics and its organization from the charter movement. The partnership has introduced new professional development opportunities for its staff and new language arts and math curriculums, Cecilia Greene, director of stewardship for the partnership, said. Image Edmundo Flores, standing, leading a prayer in a park across East 113th Street from the church. Credit Todd Heisler/The New York Times “Would it have been nice if the parish had stayed open? Absolutely,” Ms. Greene said. “Are these kids getting cheated? I don’t think that’s what the principal would tell you.” The principal, Joanne Walsh, did not respond to requests for comment. During his visit, the pope will first meet about 250 students from Queen of Angels and three other Catholic schools in the city. Most of the students will be third graders. Later, in the school’s gymnasium, he will meet with immigrants and refugees, including day laborers and a group of unaccompanied minors who formed a soccer league in the Bronx and who had been assisted by Catholic Charities. Although Francis’ visit presents a bright moment for surviving parishes in East Harlem, Msgr. Neil Connelly, of St. Francis de Sales at 135 East 96th Street, cautioned against expecting too much. “He’s been to Argentina and the other places in South America, like Ecuador, and, I mean, Mass is not going to increase because the pope is coming,” Monsignor Connelly said. “But what he has done marvelously is he has raised the question of social justice.” Still, the surprising selection of Queen of Angels for the visit — Ms. Walsh found out Francis would be visiting the school the morning of the Vatican’s announcement, she said that day — offers a slender reed of hope for the group that continues to meet on the park benches. On the Sunday after the announcement, one worshiper handed out a news article about the visit to the others. Ms. Rodriguez, the leader of the park bench contingent, said the group was brainstorming ways to bring attention to its cause, including holding a special service the day of the pope’s visit. But at least some in the group are less sanguine about their chances of finding a papal audience. “It’d be great if he could come see us,” said Margarita Barada, 91, of East Harlem, who attended Queen of Angels for about 60 years. “If he had the time, of course it would be great. But he’s a busy pope, you know.” A version of this article appears in print on , on Page MB 4 of the New York edition with the headline: A Parish of Park Benches . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Related Coverage New York Archdiocese Will Close 7 More Churches May 8, 2015 Image Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              