   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Olympics Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Final Three Olympic Men’s Basketball Berths Are on the Line Image France’s Tony Parker, center, during a tuneup game against host Serbia on June 25. The Serbs won, 94-88. Credit Andrej Isakovic/Agence France-Presse — Getty Images By  The Associated Press July 2, 2016 Serbia and France are good enough to win men’s basketball medals at the Olympics. First, they have to get there. The final three places in the 12-team field are on the line in the three Olympic qualifying tournaments this week. Serbia and France, which won silver and bronze medals two years ago at the Basketball World Cup, will be among the favorites to earn berths after falling short last summer. The new format to fill out the Olympic field has 18 countries still in the running for spots in Rio de Janeiro. Six teams will participate in each tournament, and the three winners will head to Brazil. Some teams still trying to get there are better than a few that have already qualified. Four of the world’s top 10 will be competing, including France (fifth), Serbia (sixth), Turkey (eighth) and Greece (10th). The Serbs have a powerful team and home-court advantage as they try to lock up a spot that eluded them at last year’s EuroBasket. “We still need to fine-tune our teamwork, but that’s normal at this stage of preparations,” Serbia Coach Aleksandar Djordjevic told FIBA.com after his team won its three tuneup games. “We are going through this process together so that we will still be playing until the end of the O.Q.T., and hopefully after that, too,” he added, referring to the Olympic qualifying tournaments. Serbia is hosting a tournament in Belgrade that also includes Angola and Puerto Rico in Group A. The Czech Republic, Japan and Latvia are in Group B. In Manila, it is Turkey, Canada and Senegal in Group A, with France, New Zealand and Turkey in Group B. The Milan field is made up of Greece, Mexico and Iran in Group A, with Italy, Croatia and Tunisia in Group B. Each team will play the others in its group, with the top two finishers in each advancing to the semifinals. The tournament champions will then be drawn into the Olympic field, with two slated to end up in a group with the United States. Here is a look at some of the top contenders: Serbia The Serbs swept a home-and-home series with France and beat Greece, another top contender, in their warm-up play. Serbia has one of Europe’s top point guards in Milos Teodosic and a top young prospect in the Denver Nuggets All-Rookie selection Nikola Jokic, but it will miss the injured Timberwolves forward Nemanja Bjelica and Spurs center Boban Marjanovic, who is a free agent. PUERTO RICO The longtime guards J. J. Barea of the Dallas Mavericks and Carlos Arroyo should again provide the strength for the Puerto Ricans. FRANCE Tony Parker wants to cap his international career with an Olympic medal. The French failed to earn their chance playing on home soil last summer when Spain beat them in the EuroBasket semifinals, but they stand a good chance now if they can hold on until the arrival of Nicolas Batum, who agreed on Friday to a five-year, $120 million deal to remain with the Charlotte Hornets. TURKEY A tough defense, anchored by the N.B.A. center Omer Asik, always gives the Turks a chance to stay in games. They gave the United States its toughest test in the 2014 Basketball World Cup. CANADA With the Timberwolves star Andrew Wiggins sitting out, the Canadians could regret not having locked up a spot when they blew a late lead against Venezuela in last year’s FIBA Americas semifinals. GREECE Giannis Antetokounmpo of the Milwaukee Bucks is a do-everything star, and Sacramento’s Kostas Koufos is a solid center for a Greek team that defeated Turkey twice during its pretournament schedule. ITALY The Italians have not reached the Olympics since taking the silver medal in 2004. But they have plenty of shooting behind the N.B.A. players Danilo Gallinari and Marco Belinelli, as well as having the former No. 1 pick Andrea Bargnani, a top coach in the Spurs assistant Ettore Messina, and the backing of a home crowd to get them there this time. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page SP 4 of the New York edition with the headline: Final Basketball Berths Are Up for Grabs . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Related Coverage Yuliya Stepanova, Whistle-Blowing Russian Runner, Gets Backing in Olympic Bid July 1, 2016 Image Michael Phelps Beats Ryan Lochte, but a Rio Rematch Awaits July 1, 2016 Image Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              