   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Pro Basketball Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Cavaliers 128, Raptors 93 LeBron James and the Cavaliers Earn Themselves Some Rest Image Cleveland’s LeBron James only scored 10 points in the first half, but he came alive in the second half and the Cavaliers easily beat the Toronto Raptors to earn a series sweep. Credit Tony Dejak/Associated Press By  Benjamin Hoffman May 7, 2018 It would have been a career night for nearly any other player in the N.B.A., but for LeBron James, a line of 29 points, eight rebounds and 11 assists in the Cleveland Cavaliers’ series-clinching win against the Toronto Raptors on Monday hardly seemed noteworthy. That’s how outlandish expectations for James have gotten. These playoffs have offered plenty of highlights for James. He’s crossed the 40-point mark four times, recorded two triple-doubles, and hit two game-winning buzzer beaters. He broke Tim Duncan’s record for career postseason minutes played (in 28 fewer games than Duncan) and he so thoroughly humiliated the top-seeded Raptors on their home court that the term “LeBronto” was coined. He even managed to make high-arching fadeaway jumpers from the midrange look cool as he regularly used DeMar DeRozan’s signature shot to defeat him. But in Monday’s 128-93 win in Cleveland that gave the Cavaliers a sweep of the Eastern Conference semifinal series, James’s often-underwhelming supporting cast provided nearly as many first-half highlights as their unquestioned leader did. Kevin Love, never known for his defensive tenacity, was a force around the basket, J.R. Smith poured in 12 first-quarter points, and Kyle Korver did stellar work beyond the perimeter, going 3 for 3 from 3-point range. James scored just 2 points in the first quarter and 10 in the half. But even his most frequent detractor, the FS1 commentator Skip Bayless, seemed to understand that taking things easy for a little while and letting the other Cavaliers do the heavy lifting made sense. James was never going to take the whole game off. In the second half he reasserted himself as the center of the Cavaliers’ universe and slammed the door on the Raptors, extending his own record to 12 career sweeps in best-of-seven series. The latest quick dismissal earned James and his teammates a minimum of five days of rest before they play another game, which could stretch to seven depending on how the series between the Boston Celtics and Philadelphia 76ers plays out. (Philadelphia picked itself off the mat in Game 4 on Monday, avoiding a sweep by Boston.) “We’re about to get some rest,” James said emphatically in an on-court interview broadcast on TNT. “I’m definitely about to get some rest.” Cleveland appeared to be running on fumes entering the series against the Raptors, having just finished a hard-fought, seven-game series against the Indiana Pacers. B ut instead of wilting they seemed to get stronger leading into what will be James’s eighth consecutive appearance in the Eastern Conference Finals. The question, of course, is whether any of James’s heroics will ultimately matter. In the conference finals he will be facing one of two youth-laden teams engineered to try to end his dominant run. The 76ers have “The Process,” and the Celtics were similarly built through free agency and the draft; whichever team survives will want to prove that their many can beat the Cavaliers’ few. Even if James can will his teammates beyond Boston or Philadelphia, he then would face long odds in the finals against the challenger from the Western Conference, most likely either the Golden State Warriors or the Houston Rockets, as both teams hold 3-1 series leads. For now, James will rest and wait to see how things play out. After he proved that Toronto’s deep lineup was no match for him, he will be eager to prove the same is true for the other teams that appear so much better on paper. At some point people may be reminded to stop doubting him, at least as far as Eastern Conference playoff games are concerned. And if things don’t work out in the playoffs, Enes Kanter has suggested he can join the Knicks . A version of this article appears in print on , on Page B 9 of the New York edition with the headline: Once Again, Cavs Brush Past Raptors to Advance . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Related Coverage ‘King’ James Briefly Sat, and His Subjects Carried the Load April 29, 2018 Image LeBron James and Michael Jordan Now Have Another Thing in Common: The Shot April 26, 2018 Image LeBron James Is a One-Man Show. Sometimes That Is the Problem. April 24, 2018 Image Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              