   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Movies Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Fall Movie Release Schedule Image Ryan Gosling and Emma Stone in Damien Chazelle’s “La La Land.” Credit Dale Robinette/Lionsgate By  Anita Gates Sept. 16, 2016 All dates are subject to change. September Sept. 23 AUDRIE & DAISY A 15-year-old girl in California and a 14-year-old girl in Missouri both went to parties, drank too much and were the victims of group sexual assaults by boys they knew. But the pain didn’t stop there. Their lives were made more miserable by cyberbullying and the distribution of videos and photographs. Bonni Cohen and Jon Shenk tell the two stories in a documentary that The Hollywood Reporter described as “wrenching to watch but told with clarity and guts.” Both girls attempted suicide; one succeeded. CHRONIC As long as he’s on the job, as a nurse working with terminally ill patients in their homes, David (Tim Roth) is strong, confident and involved. Away from work, he’s a mess, a chronic depressive who needs help. With Sarah Sutherland (daughter of Kiefer and granddaughter of Donald). Written and directed by Michel Franco, who won the award for best screenplay at Cannes in 2015. CLOSET MONSTER Oscar, an unhappy gay teenager who witnessed a hate crime when he was a little boy, will do anything to get out of his small town and away from his seriously screwed-up father. A talking hamster and a vivid imagination may help. Connor Jessup stars in this drama, written and directed by Stephen Dunn. It won best Canadian feature film at the Toronto International Film Festival. DIRTY 30 For Kate’s 30th birthday, she and two female friends — each unhappy in her own way — plan a small, tasteful party that turns out to be neither. A comedy starring Mamrie Hart, Hannah Hart and Grace Helbig. Andrew Bush directed. THE DRESSMAKER Kate Winslet rocks some glamorous 1950s couture and cigarette holders in this revenge comedy. She’s a successful woman who goes back to her unsophisticated small town. Judy Davis is her mentally unstable mother. And Liam Hemsworth is the handsome hometown farmer. Directed by Jocelyn Moorhouse. THE FREE WORLD When a woman covered in blood stumbles into your workplace, yes, you should help her, but maybe don’t take her home. Mo, an ex-con (who really was innocent), is trying to turn his life around but learns how complicated good deeds can become. Boyd Holbrook and Elisabeth Moss star, with Octavia Spencer as Mo’s boss. Jason Lew wrote and directed this drama, his feature debut. GENERATION STARTUP Six recent college graduates go entrepreneurial, and this documentary follows them for 17 months. Directed by Cynthia Wade and Cheryl Miller Houser. Image Ben Schnetzer, left, and Nick Jonas in the fraternity-hazing drama “Goat,” directed by Andrew Neel. Credit Ethan Palmer/Paramount Pictures GOAT A fraternity-hazing drama about a 19-year-old (Ben Schnetzer) experiencing hell week in a particularly awful way. When it screened at Sundance, Vanity Fair found it both “brutal and harrowing” but with “something deeply sympathetic and sorrowful at work.” Nick Jonas and James Franco star. Andrew Neel directed. I.T. Pierce Brosnan plays a rich guy with a smart house in a thriller whose villain is the information-technology guy. James Frecheville plays the young consultant who knows way too many passwords and uses his skills to threaten the boss’s wife, daughter and business. John Moore (“A Good Day to Die Hard”) directed. THE JAZZ LOFT ACCORDING TO W. EUGENE SMITH What would midcentury America have done without Life magazine? In the late 1950s and early ’60s, Mr. Smith, a Life photographer, turned his camera and his tape recorder on a rundown apartment in New York’s flower district and captured jazz greats like Thelonious Monk and Hall Overton, just hanging. Sara Fishko directed this documentary. THE LOVERS AND THE DESPOT In the 1950s, they were the Brad and Angelina of South Korea’s film industry, but their romance ended. In the ’70s, the North Korean dictator Kim Jong-il, a movie fanatic, kidnapped Choi Eun-hee, the actress, and Shin Sang-ok, the filmmaker, and imprisoned them for years, forcing them to make films together. A stranger-than-fiction documentary from Rob Cannan and Ross Adam. THE MAGNIFICENT SEVEN Yul Brynner, Steve McQueen, Eli Wallach and company starred in the original 1960 western. In this remake, Denzel Washington, Ethan Hawke, Chris Pratt, Byung-hun Lee, Manuel Garcia-Rulfo, Martin Sensmeier and Vincent D’Onofrio ride into town as bad guys hired by a small village’s citizens to save them from tyranny. Directed by Antoine Fuqua. MY BLIND BROTHER Sophie Goodhart’s rom-com-dram is a love triangle with complications. Boy who feels guilty about his brother’s blindness meets girl who feels guilty about her boyfriend’s death, but the girl is soon dating the blind brother, too. With Nick Kroll, Adam Scott and Jenny Slate. Image Madina Nalwanga, left, and Lupita Nyong’o in Mira Nair’s “Queen of Katwe.” Credit Edward Echwalu/Disney QUEEN OF KATWE How a Ugandan girl, an elementary-school dropout selling corn on the streets, became a chess champion. Madina Nalwanga plays Phiona Mutesi, the real-life prodigy. David Oyelowo is the athlete turned missionary who teaches her the game and tells her, “Sometimes the place you are used to is not the place you belong.” Lupita Nyong’o is Phiona’s mother, a widow who says of career and future, “Don’t think about such things.” Mira Nair directed this drama, filmed in Uganda and South Africa. THE RUINS OF LIFTA They stand near the western entrance to Jerusalem: dozens of stone houses that were once part of Lifta, a Palestinian-Arab village whose population was driven out by Israelis in the 1948 war — the only one of those villages, in fact, that wasn’t destroyed or hasn’t been repopulated. In the face of a plan to demolish the homes and replace them with luxury villas, Lifta is the setting in this documentary for a reconsideration of the Holocaust and the Nakba (Palestinian exile). Yacoub Odeh, who was forced out of Lifta in his youth, and Menachem Daum, an Orthodox Jewish man from Brooklyn whose mother was a Holocaust survivor, are the key figures in this work directed by Mr. Daum and Oren Rudavsky. SEED: THE UNTOLD STORY A full 94 percent of the seed varieties known on earth vanished during the last century, according to this documentary about the sad state of the planet’s food supply. “I see myself as Noah,” one activist says. The directors Jon Betz and Taggart Siegel argue that it’s a battle of good versus evil, with Monsanto, Dow and other purveyors of industrial agriculture as the villains. Image Junior (voiced by Andy Samberg) and Tulip (Katie Crown) in “Storks.” Credit Warner Bros. STORKS In the future, storks don’t deliver babies; they drop off packages for a huge global retailer. But in this animated adventure, one bird (voiced by Andy Samberg) accidentally turns on the old Baby Making Machine, and now he and his best friend have to get the resulting pink-haired infant girl to her home. Heartwarming moral: It’s never too late to find your family. The voice cast also includes Jennifer Aniston, Kelsey Grammer, Keegan-Michael Key and Jordan Peele. Sept. 28 SAND STORM As if Jalila didn’t have enough problems, she has to plan a beautiful wedding celebration for her husband and his young second bride. And now her daughter is having a very forbidden affair with a university student. From Israel, a drama, set in the polygamous Bedouin culture, that won the world cinema grand jury prize at Sundance. Directed by Elite Zexer. THARLO The title character is an isolated Tibetan shepherd with a ponytail who can quote Mao word for word but still needs an identification card. In Pema Tseden’s black-and-white fish-out-of-water drama, Tharlo (Shide Nyima) is forced to go into the nearby town and interact with other human beings. He meets a woman. Sept. 29 THE HURT BUSINESS An inside look at mixed martial arts, complete with big money, doping scandals and life-destroying brain injuries. Vlad Yudin directed this documentary, which features the sport’s major names, including Ronda Rousey, Jon Jones and Chuck Liddell. Sept. 30 AMANDA KNOX A young woman from Seattle studying in Italy, Ms. Knox was found guilty of killing her roommate in Perugia, and spent four years in prison before her conviction was overturned in a complicated and lengthy case. This documentary, directed by Rod Blackhurst and Brian McGinn, takes a hard look at its subject. AMERICAN HONEY Andrea Arnold’s drama, starring Shia LaBeouf and Sasha Lane, won the jury prize at this year’s Cannes Film Festival. A young woman joins a lost group of young people who try to survive by selling magazines door to door on a road trip that doubles as an examination of a slice of America. AMONG THE BELIEVERS “They train kids to be suicide bombers here!” a distraught man shouts outside a school during a demonstration in Pakistan. This documentary, from Hemal Trivedi and Mohammed Ali Naqvi, takes us inside the school to prove that claim. The school system is run by Maulana Abdul Aziz, a cleric and ISIS supporter whose goal is to impose Shariah law around the globe. COMING THROUGH THE RYE In 1969, an unpopular boy runs away from boarding school to find J. D. Salinger, the reclusive author whose “Catcher in the Rye” hero, Holden Caulfield, is the boy’s fictional soul mate. Starring Alex Wolff, Stefania Owen (as the townie who gives him a lift) and Chris Cooper as Salinger. Jim Sadwith directed. DANNY SAYS The Ramones sang about him. Danny Fields, a music-industry connector extraordinaire, is the subject of this documentary by Brendan Toller. Mr. Fields also discovered or worked with the Doors, Iggy Pop, Cream, Judy Collins and Lou Reed. Image Gina Rodriguez and Mark Wahlberg in “Deepwater Horizon.” Credit David Lee/Lionsgate DEEPWATER HORIZON In April 2010, an oil rig drilling for BP exploded in the Gulf of Mexico, off the coast of Louisiana, resulting in a major environmental disaster and the deaths of 11 people. Peter Berg directed this drama about what happened that day, starring Mark Wahlberg, Dylan O’Brien and Kate Hudson. DENIAL In one of her books, a historian (Rachel Weisz) calls a man (Timothy Spall) a Holocaust denier, and he sues her for libel. In the British judicial system, the burden of proof is on the defendant, so winning the case means she must show the flaws in his arguments. Based on a 2000 court case and directed by Mick Jackson (“Temple Grandin”). The screenplay is by the playwright David Hare. DO NOT RESIST In small-town America, police forces behave like military enforcers, with an “us versus them” mentality. That’s the argument made by Craig Atkinson’s film, which was named best documentary at the Tribeca Film Festival this year. The movie travels from Ferguson, Mo., to congressional hearings in Washington and includes the sight of a law-enforcement trainer advocating “righteous violence.” FLOCK OF DUDES A coming-of-age story about a man in his 30s. Chris D’Elia (from the series “Undateable” and “Whitney”) stars in this ensemble comedy as a bachelor who decides the only way to grow up, finally, is to dump his emotionally immature best pals. With Skylar Astin, Bryan Greenberg and Hannah Simone. Bob Castrone directed. GIRL ASLEEP From Australia, the bittersweet trauma of a 14-year-old (Bethany Whitmore) turning 15 at a new school in a new suburb in the 1970s. After the mean girls at her birthday party serenade her with a song insulting her inadequate breast development, Greta retreats into dark fantasy. Directed by Rosemary Myers. HARRY & SNOWMAN One day in 1956, a Dutch immigrant named Harry de Leyer went to a Pennsylvania auction and bought a plow horse for $80, saving the animal from slaughter. That horse, Snowman, turned out to have hidden talents and went on to win the triple crown of show jumping. Ron Davis’s documentary tells the story, with the help of Mr. de Leyer, now in his late 80s. LONG WAY NORTH From France, an animated feature set in 19th-century Russia. A young rich girl in St. Petersburg is distraught when her grandfather, an Arctic explorer, doesn’t come home from his latest trip. She sets out on her own adventure to learn what happened to his ship. Rémi Chayé directed. A MAN CALLED OVE The grumpiest man in a tenants’ association makes a friend when new neighbors back their car into his mailbox. Rolf Lassgard and Bahar Pars star. Hannes Holm wrote and directed, based on a best-selling Swedish novel. Image Zach Galifianakis and Kristen Wiig in the action comedy “Masterminds.” Credit Glen Wilson/Armored Car Productions MASTERMINDS Zach Galifianakis in an action comedy about a painfully naïve armored-car driver with bad hair, who, against all odds, pulls off a $17 million heist. Afterward, everything that could go wrong does. With Owen Wilson, Jason Sudeikis and Kristen Wiig. Jared Hess (“Napoleon Dynamite”) directed. MISS PEREGRINE’S HOME FOR PECULIAR CHILDREN Tim Burton turns his dark talents to a fantasy adventure involving time travel, invisible monsters and, yes, a peculiar child or two. The large cast includes Chris O’Dowd, Eva Green, Asa Butterfield and Samuel L. Jackson. M. S. DHONI: THE UNTOLD STORY Batsman, wicketkeeper and favorite son. From India, a how-he-got-there biopic about the cricket star, played by Sushant Singh Rajput. Neeraj Pandey directed. PASSAGE TO MARS If you’re going to rehearse for a trip to Mars, go spend some time in the Arctic. Jean-Christophe Jeauffre directed this documentary-adventure hybrid about a six-month NASA mission that stretched to two years. Zachary Quinto and Charlotte Rampling offer voice talent; Buzz Aldrin plays himself. October Oct. 7 BEING 17 From France and André Téchiné, a drama about adolescent sexual awakening. In a scenic town in the Pyrénées, two high school boys who have to live together temporarily appear to develop an immediate mutual dislike, but something more is going on. With Kacey Mottet-Klein and Corentin Fila. At the Berlin Film Festival, Variety called this the 73-year-old Mr. Téchiné’s “most youthful film yet.” BETTER OFF SINGLE Just how disheartening is the New York dating scene, even for a good-looking guy like Charlie (Aaron Tveit)? In this comedy, it drives him to hallucinations and strange fantasies. Maybe he shouldn’t have quit his job and broken up with his girlfriend on the same day. With Abby Elliott, Lewis Black and Annaleigh Ashford. Benjamin Cox wrote and directed, making his feature-film debut. THE BIRTH OF A NATION Nate Parker wrote, directed and stars as Nat Turner, who in Virginia in 1831 led the deadliest slave rebellion in American history. The film won two awards at the Sundance Film Festival but has since become embroiled in controversy over a rape case involving Mr. Parker, who was acquitted. With Armie Hammer, Colman Domingo, Penelope Ann Miller and Gabrielle Union. BLUE JAY They were sweethearts in high school; now they’re dissatisfied adults who run into each other again in their small California hometown. Sarah Paulson and Mark Duplass star in this romantic drama for grown-ups. Alex Lehmann directed. THE GIRL ON THE TRAIN Dear, depressed, recently divorced Rachel (Emily Blunt) can’t help envying the perfect couple whose house she passes every day on her commute. Until one day, she happens to see something really disturbing. Tate Taylor directed this thriller, based on Paula Hawkins’s best-selling novel. With Justin Theroux and Rebecca Ferguson. THE GREASY STRANGLER It’s a Los Angeles slasher film. It’s a comedy with flatulence. It involves a father and son who run disco tours. It may be the strangest film of the year. Jim Hosking directed. THE GREAT GILLY HOPKINS A family film about a girl shuttled among foster homes, and her grand plan to find her biological mother. Starring Sophie Nélisse (as Gilly), Kathy Bates and Octavia Spencer. Based on a young adult novel and directed by Stephen Herek. THE LATE BLOOMER So there’s this perfectly happy sex therapist with one biological peculiarity. Although he’s 30, he has never gone through puberty. Doctors can induce the process, but it has to be sped up to take weeks instead of years. That’s a lot of comic acne, lust, voice-cracking and mood swings for one guy to deal with. The cast includes Johnny Simmons (as the title character), Brittany Snow, Jane Lynch and J. K. Simmons. Kevin Pollak directed. LONDONTOWN Jonathan Rhys Meyers picks up a guitar, this time as Joe Strummer, frontman of the Clash. Daniel Huttlestone plays a 14-year-old in 1970s London whose life is changed by the band. Derrick Borte directed this coming-of-age drama, which also stars Natascha McElhone and Dougray Scott. MIDDLE SCHOOL: THE WORST YEARS OF MY LIFE And no wonder. Rafe’s new school has a principal who says things like “Creativity has no place” here and a code of conduct as thick as “War and Peace.” Steve Carr directed this comedy, starring Griffin Gluck, Lauren Graham, Rob Riggle and Andrew Daly. MIRZYA An action romance from India. Rakeysh Omprakash Mehra directed this contemporary story of star-crossed lovers, which takes place both in the real world and in a fantastical, folkloric parallel universe. NEWTOWN In December, it will have been four years since a disturbed young man walked into Sandy Hook Elementary School in Newtown, Conn., and shot 26 people dead, 20 of them small children. Kim A. Snyder’s documentary talks to the people left behind. THANK YOU FOR YOUR SERVICE Tom Donahue directed this documentary, which looks at the mental health needs of American veterans. The film follows four struggling Iraq war vets and includes appearances by the actor Gary Sinise, a veterans’ advocate; Robert Gates, the former secretary of defense; and Sebastian Junger, the author and filmmaker (“Restrepo”). THEO WHO LIVED In 2012, Theo Padnos was an American journalist abroad who just couldn’t seem to get an assignment, even though he spoke fluent Arabic. He decided to sneak into Syria to report on refugee-camp conditions but was kidnapped by Islamic militants, tortured and held for 22 months. In this documentary, written and directed by David Schisgall, Mr. Padnos returns to the Middle East to retrace his steps and explain how he survived, mentally and physically. THE 13TH The 13th Amendment, which abolished slavery, that is. Ava DuVernay follows “Selma” with this documentary consideration of mass incarceration in the United States and the for-profit prison industry. Ms. DuVernay interviews Senator Cory Booker, Angela Davis and Henry Louis Gates Jr., among others. 37 Kitty Genovese’s murder in Queens in 1964 has been the subject of a host of books, articles and films because 37 neighbors supposedly heard but did nothing to help. (That report, initially in The New York Times, was later debunked.) Christina Brucato plays Genovese in this drama, but the focus is on the bystanders and their daily crises. With Samira Wiley, Michael Potts and Maria Dizzia. Puk Grasten directed. VOYAGE OF TIME: LIFE’S JOURNEY Terrence Malick has already looked at the history of the cosmos, in that long psychedelic sequence in “The Tree of Life,” but here he goes again. Cate Blanchett narrates this 90-minute documentary, which starts with the Big Bang and ends in the future. (A 40-minute Imax version, narrated by Brad Pitt, is also being released.) Oct. 12 TOWER America’s first mass school shooting took place under Lyndon B. Johnson’s watch. Fifty years ago,at the University of Texas at Austin, a gunman opened fire from the top of a clock tower, and 16 died that day. Keith Maitland directed this animated (yes) documentary about the people who were affected and the people who helped them. The film won multiple awards at South by Southwest this year. Oct. 13 Image From left, Don Lake, Ed Begley Jr., Jane Lynch and Michael Hitchcock in “Mascots.” Credit Scott Garfield/Netflix MASCOTS Christopher Guest has shown us the absurdities in dog shows, community theater, folk music and movie awards. Now he and his merry band of actors take on the fuzzy world of sports-team mascots. The cast includes Jane Lynch, Fred Willard, Bob Balaban, Jennifer Coolidge, Ed Begley Jr. and Parker Posey. Oct. 14 THE ACCOUNTANT Ben Affleck stars in this thriller as a cognitively brilliant but obsessive small-town C.P.A. (he’s on the autism spectrum) who secretly freelances for drug cartels, assassins and other evil types. The Treasury Department is just about to bring him down, and a client’s clerk (Anna Kendrick) is asking, “Who are you?” J. K. Simmons (an Oscar winner for “Whiplash”) plays the fed on his tail. Gavin O’Connor directed. AQUARIUS Sonia Braga stars as a retired music critic who refuses to leave her apartment building in Recife, Brazil, even though she’s the last resident. Her decision to battle the developers turns her formerly quiet life as a widow into something like a tension-filled thriller. From Brazil, directed by Kleber Mendonça Filho (“Neighboring Sounds”). THE BAD KIDS If you’re a student at Black Rock Continuation High School in the Mojave Desert in California, it’s because you’re already in trouble and in danger of dropping out. This vérité-style documentary, directed by Keith Fulton and Lou Pepe, follows the principal and three students through a year of struggles. CERTAIN WOMEN Three women in Montana — a lawyer, a law student and a house hunter — try to manage their lives. Laura Dern, Kristen Stewart and Michelle Williams star. Kelly Reichardt directed. CHRISTINE In 1974, Christine Chubbuck was 29 and doing well in her career as a television talk-show host in Sarasota, Fla., but unhappy with her empty personal life. One morning, she announced “another first” for the station and shot herself in the head on live TV. Rebecca Hall stars as Chubbuck, with Michael C. Hall, Tracy Letts and John Cullum. Antonio Campos directed. THE DAVID DANCE Danger Dave’s radio fans love his witty banter on “Gay Talk” in Buffalo. What they don’t know is that off the air, this poised celebrity is soft-spoken and insecure, and his divorced sister wants him to play father to the Brazilian orphan she’s adopting. Don Scimé, who plays Dave, wrote the New York International Fringe Festival play on which the film is based. Aprill Winney directed. DESIERTO Gael García Bernal stars in this thriller about a group of unarmed people trying to cross the border from Mexico into the United States. But shots ring out. They’re being stalked by an American vigilante who wants to take illegal immigration into his own hands, and in the desert there’s pretty much no place to hide. Jonás Cuarón directed. KEVIN HART: WHAT NOW? Mr. Hart’s stand-up comedy, filmed at a football stadium in Philadelphia. LITTLE SISTER Colleen is a dignified young nun now, but not long ago she was a wild goth. She’s thrown back into that old life when her mother sends for her. Her brother (Keith Poulson) is home from Iraq, but Mom (Ally Sheedy) doesn’t mention how damaged he is. Zach Clark wrote and directed this dark comic drama. Addison Timlin stars as Colleen. MISS HOKUSAI From Japan, an animated feminist coming-of-age story. O-Ei Hokusai quietly draws amazing portraits inside her art studio, while her father takes credit for her work. The Hollywood Reporter called it “gorgeous — a small poetic wonder.” Directed by Keiichi Hara. ORDINARY WORLD Billie Joe Armstrong (uh-huh, the Green Day guy) stars as a former punk rocker living his worst nightmare: a quotidian life in Queens as a husband, father and hardware-store employee. He hopes a blow-it-all-out 40th-birthday party will shake things up. With Selma Blair, Judy Greer and Fred Armisen. Lee Kirk wrote and directed. SKY LADDER: THE ART OF CAI GUO-QIANG Mr. Cai’s idea of art is a six-mile-long gunpowder fuse coming out of the Great Wall of China or a 1,750-foot-tall ladder of fire. Kevin Macdonald (“The Last King of Scotland”) directed this documentary, which looks at the artist and his work. Oct. 21 AMERICAN PASTORAL It’s been a good year so far for Philip Roth dramas (“Indignation”). Ewan McGregor stars (and makes his directorial debut) in this adaptation of Mr. Roth’s Pulitzer Prize-winning novel about a suburban businessman, husband and father whose life falls apart in 1968. That’s when his daughter (Dakota Fanning), involved in Vietnam War protests, bombs a post office, killing a bystander. With Jennifer Connelly, Uzo Aduba and David Strathairn. ASPERGER’S ARE US A group of four pals, all on the autism spectrum, band together to create their own comedy team. Now they’re doing a milestone show. Alex Lehmann directed this documentary. AUTUMN LIGHTS An American photographer (Guy Kent) in a remote part of Iceland meets a mysterious European couple in this drama. Angad Aulakh directed. CREEPY A horror film from Japan, directed by Kiyoshi Kurosawa, in which a former detective is called back to work on a very peculiar case. It may have something to do with his odd new neighbor, whose daughter announces one day, “This man is not my father.” FIRE AT SEA Lampedusa, a Mediterranean island, has become a transit point for immigrants escaping Africa and the Middle East — and the site of tragedy after tragedy. Gianfranco Rosi’s documentary, which won the top prize at the Berlin Film Festival, contrasts a 12-year-old boy’s ordinary life there with the humanitarian agonies around him. THE HANDMAIDEN From South Korea, a drama about a Japanese woman in the 1930s who hires the wrong maid. This devious one is part of a plot to cheat her wealthy employer out of her fortune. Park Chan-wook directed a cast led by Kim Min-hee and Kim Tae-ri. IN A VALLEY OF VIOLENCE Ethan Hawke stars in this revenge western as a drifter headed for Mexico who takes a shortcut and finds himself in an old mining town, nearly abandoned now and run by thugs. The marshal’s son (James Ransone) is a troublemaker, and the marshal is John Travolta. Ti West wrote and directed. JACK REACHER: NEVER GO BACK Tom Cruise returns as Reacher, the super-aggressive former Army cop who wanders the country with a scowl and scary weapons, making life miserable for bad guys. This time he’s suspected of a long-ago homicide. Cobie Smulders is an Army major accused of espionage. Edward Zwick, who worked with Mr. Cruise on “The Last Samurai,” is the director. KEEPING UP WITH THE JONESES Not being outshone by the neighbors was always hard, even before the title phrase came into common use a century ago. But in this action comedy from Greg Mottola, one suburban couple (Zach Galifianakis and Isla Fisher) really have a challenge. Their new, ridiculously glamorous and sophisticated neighbors are Don Draper and Wonder Woman (Jon Hamm and Gal Gadot). But when Couple No. 1 learns that the newcomers are actually spies, peer envy is the least of their problems. KING COBRA When a lonely guy in suburbia goes into the gay porn business, he lucks out by discovering a new star. Unfortunately, rival pornographers (who want to steal the star) are not nice people. James Franco, Christian Slater, Garret Clayton and Keegan Allen star. Justin Kelly wrote and directed this thriller. MOONLIGHT Based on Tarell Alvin McCraney’s play, this drama about growing up in a Miami neighborhood ravaged by drugs is, in A. O. Scott’s words, “a meditation on desire, identity and friendship.” With Mahershala Ali, Trevante Rhodes, André Holland and Naomie Harris. Barry Jenkins adapted and directed. NATIONAL BIRD A documentary about America’s drone attacks and the veterans speaking out against them. Directed by Sonia Kennebeck. OUIJA: ORIGIN OF EVIL In 1960s Los Angeles, a psychic’s new Ouija board gets out of hand, and her little girl is taken over by an evil force. With Doug Jones, Henry Thomas, Elizabeth Reaser and Kate Siegel. A supernatural-thriller sequel directed by Mike Flanagan. TYLER PERRY’S BOO! A MADEA HALLOWEEN Mr. Perry wrote, directed and stars in his latest comedy feature, more than a decade after moviegoers first met the tyrannical, grandmotherly Madea (Mr. Perry) in “Diary of a Mad Black Woman.” She’s looking lovely here, in paisley and pearls, when she’s asked to chaperone a wild Halloween party. Drunk teenagers don’t scare her, but the zombies, poltergeists and otherworldly handwriting may. With Cassi Davis, Patrice Lovely and Bella Thorne. THE UNCONDEMNED Of course, rape is a war crime, but prosecuting it as such was groundbreaking in 1997, when the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda did just that. Michele Mitchell and Nick Louvel directed this documentary. WE ARE X Fresh from the festival circuit, a music documentary about the rock group X Japan; its frontman, Yoshiki; and the band’s tumultuous 30-year history. “If those guys were born in America,” Gene Simmons says in the film, “they might be the biggest band in the world.” Stephen Kijak directed. THE WHOLE TRUTH Keanu Reeves and Renée Zellweger star in this courtroom thriller. He’s the defense lawyer, and she’s the mother of the teenage defendant (Gabriel Basso), charged with murdering his father. All kinds of secrets begin to come out, partly with the help of the lawyer’s new associate (Gugu Mbatha-Raw). Courtney Hunt directed. Oct. 26 PORTRAIT OF A GARDEN Daan van der Have lives near Rotterdam, the Netherlands, on an estate that dates to the 1630s. His pride and joy is the estate’s “kitchen garden” of flowering trees and vegetables, where he and his octogenarian pruning master, Jan Freriks, know how to shape a black mulberry espalier — just the way it was decreed by Louis XIV. From the Netherlands, a documentary meditation on patience and connoisseurship, written and directed by Rosie Stapel. Oct. 28 BLOOD ON THE MOUNTAIN A documentary about the people of West Virginia, looking at economic and environmental injustice, limited opportunity and corporate exploitation. Mari-Lynn Evans and Jordan Freeman directed. BY SIDNEY LUMET Lumet, who died in 2011, sat down for this interview in 2008 and talked about the films he’d brought to the screen, along with the lessons and morality behind them. Nancy Buirski directed this documentary, which includes clips from “Dog Day Afternoon,” “Serpico,” “Network” and other Lumet masterworks. THE EAGLE HUNTRESS Otto Bell’s documentary is everything you always wanted to know about Kazakh eagle-hunting traditions in Mongolia. Our subject, Aisholpan, is 13 and the first girl in 12 generations of her family to be trained for the job. It may sound obscure but it wowed Sundance, where the New York Times critic Manohla Dargis called it “a bliss-out.” Daisy Ridley narrates. GIMME DANGER “This is what happens when a band lives fast and dies young,” a critic for Variety wrote when this documentary was at the Cannes Film Festival. Jim Jarmusch brings us the rock ’n’ roll story of Iggy Pop and the Stooges, who in the late ’60s and early ’70s set the stage for punk. INFERNO Thank goodness Robert Langdon from “The Da Vinci Code” has awakened from his coma. Now, if he can only get his memory back, he can stop a madman from killing off half the world with a plague. There’s a connection with Dante’s “Inferno.” Tom Hanks is back as Langdon. Felicity Jones is his amnesia-specialist doctor, who goes globe-trotting with him. Ron Howard directed this suspense-thriller sequel. INTO THE INFERNO In this completely un-“Da Vinci Code”-related and un-Dante-related documentary, Werner Herzog and a scientist, Clive Oppenheimer, explore volcanoes around the world and philosophize. PETER AND THE FARM He’s hard-drinking, enthusiastically foulmouthed and lives alone now on his 187-acre Vermont farm. Documentary filmmakers start out asking Peter Dunning for agricultural tips but end up looking closely at a difficult life: marriages, estranged children, hard work, solitude, alcoholism and regrets. Tony Stone directed. RINGS The third horror film about a videotape that kills you just for watching it, but that gives you seven days to freak out about your fate. Naomi Watts isn’t back this time, but Johnny Galecki stars, along with Matilda Lutz, Alex Roe, Aimee Teegarden and Laura Wiggins. This is a sequel, directed by F. Javier Gutiérrez — not a prequel, as had been rumored. No explanation for why anybody still owns a working VCR. November Nov. 2 DON’T CALL ME SON From Brazil, a drama about a teenager named Pierre who enjoys wearing eyeliner and a lace G-string and having sex with boys and girls alike. Surprise: His single mom isn’t his real mother. She kidnapped him, and now he’s going home to his birthparents. Plot twist: They’re not that open-minded. Naomi Nero stars as Pierre. Anna Muylaert wrote and directed. Nov. 4 BLEED FOR THIS  Miles Teller in a sports comeback drama, directed by Ben Younger. Mr. Teller plays a Rhode Island boxer who wins two world title fights, then breaks his neck in a car accident. Aaron Eckhart is the trainer who works with him to return to the ring. With Katey Sagal and Ciaran Hinds. Image Benedict Cumberbatch as the title superhero in “Doctor Strange.” Credit Marvel DOCTOR STRANGE Yes, they’ve gone and talked Benedict Cumberbatch into playing a Marvel superhero. Dr. Stephen Strange (born in a 1963 issue of Strange Tales comics) was an arrogant star neurosurgeon until his hands were destroyed in a car accident. Now he has shaggy hair, a beard and protects the world against magic and parallel universes, from his Greenwich Village base. This is the origin story, with Tilda Swinton (as an ancient sorcerer who, excuse me, was an Asian character in the comic books), Rachel McAdams and Chiwetel Ejiofor. Scott Derrickson directed. DOG EAT DOG In Paul Schrader’s latest, Nicolas Cage and Willem Dafoe star as ex-cons who screw up a kidnapping assignment and have to hide out from the mob. HACKSAW RIDGE Andrew Garfield stars in the true story of Desmond Doss, a Virginia-born conscientious objector who refused to carry a weapon in World War II but went into battle anyway and as a medic saved 75 men during the Battle of Okinawa. He was awarded the Medal of Honor. Directed by Mel Gibson (his first since “Apocalypto” in 2006). HARRY BENSON: SHOOT FIRST In 1964, Mr. Benson, a young photographer from Scotland, scored the assignment of a lifetime: covering the Beatles’ first visit to the United States. Matthew Miele and Justin Bare directed this documentary, which looks at Mr. Benson’s long career (at 86, he’s still working) and his subjects, who have also included Winston Churchill, Robert F. Kennedy, the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. and Muhammad Ali. THE IVORY GAME A documentary about the world of ivory trafficking and the extinction threat facing African elephants. Richard Ladkani and Kief Davidson directed, filming undercover for 16 months. LOVING That was their surname: Richard and Mildred Loving, a white man and a black woman from Virginia who married in 1958, when interracial unions were still illegal in many states. They were jailed and for a time left the state, but eventually their case went all the way to the Supreme Court. Joel Edgerton and Ruth Negga star in this portrait of their relationship. Jeff Nichols directed. MY DEAD BOYFRIEND There’s a reason Mary (Heather Graham) is walking around the city carrying an urn. She considered her ’90s New York life pretty uneventful — temp jobs, vague attempts to write, a couch-potato boyfriend — in this comedy until she came home and found the guy dead in front of the television. Things suddenly get a lot more interesting because he was leading a double life. With John Corbett, Griffin Dunne and Gina Gershon. Directed by Anthony Edwards (long ago of “E. R.”). THE PICKLE RECIPE Just how far will a D.J. go to make his daughter’s bat mitzvah happen? In this family comedy set at a Jewish deli in Detroit, the D.J. (Jon Dore) is in dire financial straits and turns to his shady uncle Morty (David Paymer). Morty will help, but only if the younger man steals his grandmother’s secret for making her fabulous dill pickles. With Lynn Cohen as the granny, who had been planning to take that recipe to her grave. Michael Manasseri directed. RAINBOW TIME A mentally challenged 40-year-old, Shonzi, has to move in with his little brother, Todd, and Todd’s new girlfriend. But he wants to be part of their relationship and doesn’t understand that there are “different kinds of love.” If the couple shuts him out, he’ll tell family secrets. Linas Phillips wrote, directed and plays Shonzi. The film also stars Timm Sharp and Melanie Lynskey. TROLLS The stars of this 3-D animated adventure are cheery creatures who sing all the time and always expect the best. Now the giant, grumpy, troll-eating (yikes!) Bergens have arrived, but maybe the little guys can fight them off with glitter — or with their tall troll hair. With the voices of Anna Kendrick and Justin Timberlake. Nov. 11 Image From left, Romany Malco, Alkoya Brunson, Nicole Ari Parker, Marley Taylor, J.B. Smoove, Kimberly Elise, Nadej Bailey, Gabrielle Union, Danny Glover and Mo’Nique in “Almost Christmas.” Credit Quantrell Colbert/Universal Pictures ALMOST CHRISTMAS Here’s the trouble with the holidays: Relatives frequently want to kill one another. In this comedy from David E. Talbert, one family is forced to spend Christmas together because the patriarch says so. The cast includes Kimberly Elise, Omar Epps, Danny Glover, Mo’Nique and Romany Malco. THE ANTHROPOLOGIST Susan Crate, an environmental anthropologist, travels the world with her teenage daughter to find out how indigenous cultures are altering their lives to adapt to climate change. This documentary, directed by Seth Kramer, Daniel A. Miller and Jeremy Newberger, covers five years of their work, from Siberia to the South Pacific. Image Amy Adams in Denis Villeneuve’s “Arrival.” Credit Jan Thijs/Paramount Pictures ARRIVAL It rarely turns out well when mysterious spaceships suddenly land all over the planet. This time, only a world-class linguist (Amy Adams) can save us, by determining what the aliens are up to. With Jeremy Renner and Forest Whitaker. From Denis Villeneuve. BILLY LYNN’S LONG HALFTIME WALK Ang Lee (an Academy Award winner for “Life of Pi” and “Brokeback Mountain” ) tries some new technology in his latest drama, about a baby-faced 19-year-old veteran being honored at a big Thanksgiving Day pro-football game. He and his buddies are the survivors of a horrific battle in Iraq, and while the 120-frames-per-second flashbacks show just how inglorious war can be, the real shock is that the young men are being sent back into battle, right after the show. Joe Alwyn, a British newcomer, plays Billy. With Kristen Stewart, Chris Tucker, Garrett Hedlund, Vin Diesel and Steve Martin. COME AND FIND ME Aaron Paul (has it really been three years since “Breaking Bad” ended?) stars as a man whose wife disappears. It turns out she was living a double life, so finding her isn’t simple (or necessarily advisable). With Annabelle Wallis and Garret Dillahunt. Zack Whedon wrote and directed. DISTURBING THE PEACE In Stephen Apkon and Andrew Young’s documentary, Israeli soldiers and Palestinian combatants do more than come together after their military service is over: They unite as antiwar activists. Image Isabelle Huppert in Paul Verhoeven’s “Elle.” Credit Guy Ferrandis/SBS Productions and Sony Pictures Classics ELLE Isabelle Huppert stars in this thriller about a Parisian video game mogul whose life changes after she is raped. But she has never seen herself as a victim, and she isn’t going to start now. It helps that game designers know something about strategic revenge. Paul Verhoeven, the director, said he had thought about moving the story to the United States, but he decided “no American actress would ever take on such an amoral movie.” SHUT IN Naomi Watts and Jacob Tremblay (the little boy from “Room”) star in this thriller about a retired psychologist, enjoying a life of quiet New England isolation, who is suddenly faced with saving a child’s life during a winter storm. Farren Blackburn directed. U.S.S. INDIANAPOLIS: MEN OF COURAGE Weeks before the end of World War II, one ship has the history-altering job of delivering the nuclear weapons that the United States is about to use. But crew members soon find themselves shipwrecked and surrounded by sharks. Nicolas Cage stars, with Tom Sizemore and Thomas Jane. Mario Van Peebles directed. Nov. 16 NOTES ON BLINDNESS The British-based theologian John Hull was in his 40s when he lost his sight. This documentary, written and directed by Peter Middleton and James Spinney, focuses on his experience, his observations and his fight “to retain the fullness of my humanity.” Mr. Hull died last year, at 80. Nov. 18 THE EDGE OF SEVENTEEN In high school, there is no rule against a girl dating her best friend’s big brother. But keeping something like that a secret from the bestie is a problem. Hailee Steinfeld and Haley Lu Richardson star in a coming-of-age comedy-drama, with Kyra Sedgwick as a hopelessly unhelpful mother and Woody Harrelson as an irreverent teacher-mentor. Kelly Fremon Craig wrote and directed. FANTASTIC BEASTS AND WHERE TO FIND THEM How to improve the Harry Potter stories without Harry: Put his world of witches and wizards in New York in 1926. J. K. Rowling wrote the screenplay, her first. David Yates directed. Eddie Redmayne stars as Newt Scamander, a magizoologist who was expelled from Hogwarts but has moved on. With Katherine Waterston, Colin Farrell and Zoe Kravitz. MANCHESTER BY THE SEA The playwright Kenneth Lonergan wrote and directed this drama set on Massachusetts’ north shore. Casey Affleck’s taciturn janitor finds himself the reluctant legal guardian of his orphaned nephew (Lucas Hedges) and has to come to terms with his estranged wife (Michelle Williams) and a long-ago tragedy. NOCTURNAL ANIMALS Amy Adams stars as an art-gallery owner frightened by her ex-husband’s violent new novel, about tragedy on a family trip. With Jake Gyllenhaal, Isla Fisher and Michael Shannon. A thriller from Tom Ford, the fashion designer turned filmmaker. Image Darius McCollum in “Off the Rails.” Credit Adam Irving/Gemini Pictures OFF THE RAILS Little Darius McCollum always loved New York subways. Motormen made him a sort of mascot and taught him the entire system by the time he was 8. The mistake made by Mr. McCollum, who has Asperger’s syndrome, was driving the trains without actually being employed by the transit authority.In middle age, he continues to be jailed time after time for his obsession. Adam Irving directed this documentary. Image A meeting of species in “The Red Turtle,” written and directed by Michael Dudok de Wit Credit Sony Pictures Classics THE RED TURTLE A French-Japanese-Belgian animated fantasy-drama for grown-up moviegoers. Without dialogue, it tells the story of a man shipwrecked on an island with only turtles, crabs and birds to keep him company. Written and directed by Michael Dudok de Wit. SPIRIT GAME: PRIDE OF A NATION A documentary about the year the Iroquois Nationals team made it to the national indoor-lacrosse finals and the championship games were held on an American Indian reservation in upstate New York. Peter Spirer and Peter Baxter directed. Nov. 23 Image Marion Cotillard and Brad Pitt in Robert Zemeckis’s “Allied.” Credit Daniel Smith/Paramount Pictures ALLIED They’ll always have Casablanca. That’s where Brad Pitt, as a Canadian spy during World War II, and Marion Cotillard, as a French agent, meet and fall in love. The complication, he learns (after the two are married and have a baby), is that she may be a Nazi spy. Robert Zemeckis, whose career has ranged from the “Back to the Future” movies to “Cast Away,” directed. With Jared Harris, Lizzy Caplan and Matthew Goode. Image Brett Kelly, left, and Billy Bob Thornton in “Bad Santa 2.” Credit Jan Thijs/Broad Green Pictures and Miramax BAD SANTA 2 Billy Bob Thornton returns in this comedy sequel as Willie Soke, the most despicable foulmouthed American who ever played a department-store Santa Claus. The only thing worse would be his mother, who shows up here played by Kathy Bates.With Tony Cox as Willie’s sidekick and Christina Hendricks as the object of his desire. A Christmas Eve heist in Chicago is on his schedule. Mark Waters directed. MOANA A teenage girl goes on an impossible ocean voyage, battles monsters, saves her people and does some mad self-actualizing while she’s at it. Disney’s newest animated comedy adventure is set in Oceania. With the voices of Auli‘i Cravalho, and Dwayne Johnson (as the demigod who teaches her how to be a “master wayfinder”). RULES DON’T APPLY Warren Beatty is back, with the first film he’s directed since “Bulworth,” 18 years ago. He also stars, as Howard Hughes. It’s Hollywood in 1958, and a virginal young actress (Lily Collins) has just arrived to begin her career on contract to Hughes. Her first mistake is falling for her boss’s handsomechauffeur. Her second may be spending the evening with Hughes. The cast includes Alden Ehrenreich (as the chauffeur), Annette Bening (as the girl’s protective mother) and Matthew Broderick (as the aide who always seems to be around). Nov. 25 EVOLUTION Mommy, why do we live on an island with only women and little boys? Why do all the mommies dress alike and hold strange meetings on the beach at night? Where did that dead body in the ocean come from? Why do I have to go to the hospital now? This horror drama is from France and the director Lucile Hadzihalilovic. With Max Brebant, Roxane Duran and Julie-Marie Parmentier. LION True story: A 5-year-old boy in India gets lost, ends up living on the streets of Calcutta, is rescued by orphanage officials and adopted by a nice Australian couple. Some 25 years later, he sets out to find his real family. Dev Patel stars as the grown man Saroo, and Sunny Pawar plays him as a boy, with a supporting cast that includes Nicole Kidman, Rooney Mara and Google Earth. Garth Davis is the first-time director. When the film screened at the Toronto film festival, a lot of reviews predicted Oscar nominations. Nov. 30 BOBBY SANDS: 66 DAYS If you happened to be in Ireland in 1981, you saw Sands’s photograph everywhere. He was a martyr already, a 27-year-old I.R.A. member behind bars for weapons possession during the Troubles, leading a hunger strike for the right for men like him to be treated as political prisoners. From Ireland, a documentary about his last two months, based on his prison diaries. Brendan J. Byrne directed. OLD STONE From China, a little social realism, a little noir, a big dose of “No good deed goes unpunished.”A taxi driver, distracted by a passenger, accidentally hits a motorcyclist and drives him to the hospital. The next thing you know, he’s being held responsible for the man’s medical bills and is in danger of losing his job and family. Johnny Ma wrote and directed. December Dec. 2 ALWAYS SHINE Two actresses who used to be close friends go to Big Sur, Calif., for the weekend, hoping to reconnect. But instead the getaway stirs up feelings of betrayal, jealousy and questions about identity. A psychological drama directed by Sophia Takal, starring Mackenzie Davis and Caitlin FitzGerald. THE EYES OF MY MOTHER A horror drama with a Portuguese accent, set on an isolated American farm. Olivia Bond plays little Francisca, who witnesses a horrible crime, and Kika Magalhaes is the grown-up Francisca, who has been messed up by it. In black-and-white, so the blood isn’t so gross. Nicolas Pesce wrote and directed. Image Halle Berry plays a mother with a mission in “Kidnap.” Credit Peter Iovino/Relativity Studios KIDNAP Halle Berry, back from outer space and superhero-world, stars in this thriller as a mother determined, really determined, to rescue her kidnapped son. Luis Prieto directed. LA LA LAND Ryan Gosling and Emma Stone in a musical. As the title suggests, the story is set in Los Angeles, land of easily crushed dreams. He’s a jazz musician; she wants to be an actress. With John Legend, Finn Wittrock and Rosemarie DeWitt. Damien Chazelle (“Whiplash”) directed. At the Venice Film Festival, The Hollywood Reporter called it “dazzling and beautiful.” At Telluride, Tom Hanks interrupted a Q. and A. about his own movie to praise it. SIREN A nice guy whose friends take him to a sex club for his bachelor party tries to save a poor, seemingly victimized woman working there. But it’s a supernatural sex club, and she turns out to be a monster, literally. With Chase Williamson, Justin Welborn and Hannah Fierman as the demon. Directed by Gregg Bishop, based on a segment of the 2012 horror anthology “V/H/S.” THINGS TO COME Isabelle Huppert plays Jill Clayburgh in “An Unmarried Woman,” sort of, except she’s French and has to deal with two huge emotional blows. Her character is a long-married philosophy teacher devoted to her aging mother. Then her husband leaves her for another woman, and her mother dies. It’s reinvent-yourself time. Mia Hansen-Love won the best director award for this at the Berlin Film Festival. Dec. 9 BYE BYE MAN “He makes us do things,” a young man says. “He” is the title character, who occupies (in some supernatural way) the same old off-campus house three college students have moved into. And it turns out he’s the force behind every truly horrible thing humans have ever done. Only the old owner’s widow (a cameo by Faye Dunaway) may know more. Stacy Title directed. LAND OF MINE Just after the end of World War II, a group of very young German prisoners of war are forced by the Danish Army to defuse and clear an enormous number of land mines left on the country’s beaches. Martin Zandvliet wrote and directed this Danish drama about the relationship between revenge and common decency. MISS SLOANE Jessica Chastain stars as a truly ruthless Washington lobbyist who plays to win, but this time she may have met her match: the vastly powerful gun lobby. John Madden ( “Shakespeare in Love” ) directed this political thriller. With Gugu Mbatha-Raw and Mark Strong. Image Kate McKinnon, Jason Bateman, T.J. Miller and Olivia Munn in “Office Christmas Party.” Credit Glen Wilson/Paramount Pictures OFFICE CHRISTMAS PARTY Jennifer Aniston and Jason Bateman are part of the ensemble-comedy cast in this story of an over-the-top holiday get-together. It was just intended to impress a new client. With T. J. Miller, Olivia Munn and Kate McKinnon. Josh Gordon and Will Speck directed. ON THE MAP A basketball documentary with a Cold War subplot. The subject is the Maccabi Tel Aviv team, which defeated the championship Soviet Union team in 1977 (just four years after the Yom Kippur war). Moshe Dayan “was at every one of our games,” recalls Eric Minkin, one of the team’s American players. Maccabi went on to win the European Cup. Dani Menkin directed. THE SALESMAN From Iran, a drama that owes its title to Arthur Miller. A young Tehran couple are starring in a community theater production of “Death of a Salesman” when they have to move and their marriage starts to fall apart. The new apartment is very questionable. With Shahab Hosseini and Taraneh Alidoosti, and directed by Asghar Farhadi. The film took home the award for best actor and best screenplay from Cannes this year. Dec. 14 GHOSTLAND The Bushmen of the Kalahari have done a lot of serious adapting in recent years, forced to abandon their hunter-gatherer economy. In this documentary from Germany, a small group of Bushmen take on the role of anthropologists, visiting Europe and concluding that the people there are “big and loud” and “want too much.” Simon Stadler directed. Dec. 16 COLLATERAL BEAUTY “It’s a little bit ‘It’s a Wonderful Life’ and a little bit ‘The Wizard of Oz,’” Will Smith told Indiewire about this drama directed by David Frankel ( “The Devil Wears Prada” ). Mr. Smith stars as a New York adman dealing with a devastating personal tragedy. Helen Mirren, Edward Norton, Keira Knightley, Kate Winslet and Michael Peña try to help him deal with his grief. THE FOUNDER Michael Keaton in 1950s cocky-guy mode as Ray Kroc, the so-called founder of McDonald’s. Actually, he was the hapless, middle-aged milkshake-mixer salesman who bought the business from the McDonald brothers and perfected their system. John Lee Hancock directed. A KIND OF MURDER Another Patricia Highsmith novel (“The Blunderer”) comes to the screen. Patrick Wilson stars as an unhappily married rich guy obsessed with a suspected wife-murderer (Eddie Marsan) and his story. Lines blur. Jessica Biel plays a neurotic wife, who may not be long for this world, and Vincent Kartheiser is a zealous police detective. Andy Goddard directed this suspense drama, set in midcentury New York. NERUDA In 1948, the poet Pablo Neruda was a senator in his native Chile. But when he criticized the government in no uncertain terms, he was threatened with arrest and went into hiding. In this Cold War-era drama about persecution, Neruda (Luis Gnecco) sets out to flee the country, playing cat and mouse with the police prefect (Gael García Bernal) on his case. Pablo Larraín directed. ROGUE ONE: A STAR WARS STORY No, this is not the next “Star Wars.” That’s going to be “Episode VIII,” in 2017. This is a separate Lucasfilm adventure about a group of people who set out to steal the plans for the Death Star. With Felicity Jones, Diego Luna, Ben Mendelsohn and Forest Whitaker. Gareth Edwards directed. Dec. 21 ASSASSIN’S CREED This man really didn’t expect the Spanish Inquisition, but he got to live through it. In this action-adventure, an everyday 21st-century bartender (Michael Fassbender) unlocks some genetic memories, becomes his ancestor in 15th-century Spain and learns that he’s descended from a secret society of assassins. Time to get busy fighting the present-day Knights Templar. With Marion Cotillard and Jeremy Irons. Based on the video-game series and directed by Justin Kurzel. AUTOPSY OF JANE DOE A father-and-son coroner team (Brian Cox and Emile Hirsch) become fascinated with a beautiful young woman whose body comes to their lab. But it could be a mistake for them to investigate what happened to her, because this is a horror film. André Ovredal directed. JULIETA Pedro Almodóvar tackles guilt, fear and abandonment in his newest drama. The title character, a middle-aged woman in Madrid, interrupts everything in her life when she learns that her daughter, who cut off ties when she was 18, is living in Switzerland and married with children. Thus begins a movie-length flashback covering youth, love, marriage and a husband’s death. Emma Suárez stars as the present-day Julieta, with Adriana Ugarte as her younger self and Daniel Grao as her husband. Mr. Almodóvar adapted the script from three short stories by Alice Munro. Image Chris Pratt and Jennifer Lawrence star in “Passengers.” Credit Jaimie Trueblood/Columbia Pictures PASSENGERS Jennifer Lawrence and Chris Pratt fall in love on a glamorous spaceship. On a really long journey to a colony planet, the suspended-animation system malfunctions, and these two wake up 90 years early. Luckily, the place is like a five-star resort, and they’re beautiful people, so they make the best of things. But then there’s a genre change: They learn the ship is in danger, as are the 5,000 other passengers still sleeping peacefully. Morten Tyldum (“The Imitation Game”) directed. PATRIOTS DAY This drama about the terrorist attack at the 2013 Boston Marathon, which killed three and injured hundreds, stars Mark Wahlberg, Kevin Bacon and J. K. Simmons as men in blue, staging a major manhunt. Peter Berg directed. SING What if all the contestants on “American Idol” were cute animals? In this animated musical comedy, a koala (the voice of Matthew McConaughey) has run into financial problems and could lose his once-very-grand theater. So he decides to produce a monumental fund-raising singing contest and sees talent immediately in a punk-rock porcupine, a crooning mouse, a teenage elephant and more. With the voices of Reese Witherspoon, Scarlett Johansson, Seth MacFarlane and Taron Egerton. THE SPACE BETWEEN US Gardner is a lucky teenager, growing up as part of the Earth colony on Mars with lots of surrogate parents. (His mother, one of the original astronauts, died in childbirth.) Now Gardner has met a girl online and wants to visit her on Earth, but strangely his organs can’t deal with Earth’s atmosphere. Everyone suddenly remembers that his mother never mentioned who the father was. Peter Chelsom directed this interplanetary adventure, with Asa Butterfield, Britt Robertson, Carla Gugino and Gary Oldman. Image Annette Bening and Lucas Jade Zumann in “20th Century Women.” Credit Merrick Morton/A24 20TH CENTURY WOMEN Life is confusing for a teenage punk-rocker in Santa Barbara, Calif., in 1979. Luckily for him, there are three great women in his life, who can teach him what he needs to know. With Annette Bening, Greta Gerwig, Elle Fanning and Lucas Jade Zumann. Mike Mills wrote and directed. Dec. 23 Image Lewis MacDougall and the title character in J.A. Bayona’s “A Monster Calls.” Credit Jose Haro/Focus Features A MONSTER CALLS When a 12-year-old boy’s mother is very ill, he could use some emotional support. In this fantasy drama, he isn’t getting it from his bullying classmates or nasty grandmother, but he’s lucky enough to find a tree monster — terrifyingly tall but kind and wise — at his bedroom window. Starring Felicity Jones, Sigourney Weaver, Liam Neeson (as the monster) and Lewis MacDougall. J. A. Bayona directed. I, DANIEL BLAKE When Ken Loach’s newest film won the Palme d’Or at Cannes, Variety called it “a work of scalding and moving relevance.” Dave Johns, a British comic, stars as Daniel, a widowed carpenter who runs up against heartless English bureaucracy when he can no longer work after a heart attack. Hayley Squires plays the single mother he befriends as he fights for his survival and dignity. Dec. 25 Image Denzel Washington and Viola Davis in “Fences,” directed by Mr. Washington. Credit David Lee/Paramount Pictures FENCES August Wilson’s Pulitzer Prize-winning play comes to the screen, directed by and starring Denzel Washington as a former Negro Leagues baseball star reduced in the 1950s to life as a Pittsburgh sanitation worker. Both Mr. Washington and Viola Davis, as his graciously resigned wife, won Tony Awards when they played the roles onstage six years ago . The New York Times said Mr. Washington “might as well have ‘Warning: Explosives’ tattooed across his forehead, with ‘Breakable’ stamped on his back.” TONI ERDMANN At Cannes, Manohla Dargis, writing in The New York Times, called it “a work of great beauty, great feeling and great cinema.” Time Out London declared it “just brilliant.” In this German comic drama, a father tries to reconnect with his stressed-out management-consultant daughter. He chooses to do this by disguising himself as the title character. Peter Simonischek and Sandra Hüller star. Written and directed by Maren Ade. WHY HIM? The happy news for Bryan Cranston’s character is that his daughter, a Stanford student, has found her true love. The complication is that the guy is an enormous jerk (James Franco), a Silicon Valley zillionaire who was too busy getting rich to develop any social filters. It’s a comedy, directed by John Hamburg. With Megan Mullally and Zoey Deutch. Dec. 28 PATERSON Adam Driver plays a bus driver named Paterson who lives in Paterson, N.J. This week-in-the-life drama, Jim Jarmusch’s second film of the season, reveals the driver as a man of routine whose only creative outlet is writing poetry, and his wife (Golshifteh Farahani) as a fireball of new projects and changing passions. The real poetry is in the details. Compiled with the assistance of Suzanne O’Connor. Correction :  Because of an editing error, an entry in a listing of fall movie releases last Sunday about “The Ruins of Lifta” misspelled the surname of one of the film’s directors. He is Oren Rudavsky, not Rudavsk. And an entry about the documentary “The Anthropologist” misspelled the surname of the titular character. It is Susan Crate, not Crates. Correction :  An entry in the film listings on Sept. 18 about “The Edge of Seventeen” misspelled the given name of an actress in the film. She is Haley Lu Richardson, not Hayley. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page AR 67 of the New York edition with the headline: Let There Be Birds and Thieves and Frat Boys . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Related Coverage Emily Blunt Rides the Unnerving Rails of Addiction in ‘The Girl on the Train’ Sept. 13, 2016 Image Denzel Washington, Ethan Hawke and Antoine Fuqua on ‘The Magnificent Seven’ Sept. 14, 2016 Image Eddie Redmayne’s Guide to ‘Fantastic Beasts’ Sept. 12, 2016 Image Show All Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              