   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Briefing Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Asia and Australia Edition Trump, Turnbull, Marine Le Pen: Your Morning Briefing By  Charles McDermid May 3, 2017 Good morning. Here’s what you need to know: Image Credit Stephen Crowley/The New York Times • President Trump plunged into Middle East peacemaking in a meeting with the Palestinian leader, Mahmoud Abbas, at the White House . And Rex W. Tillerson laid out his vision as secretary of state, saying the U.S. had been far too accommodating to emerging nations and longtime allies. Mr. Trump now prepares to meet with Australia’s prime minister, Malcolm Turnbull, in New York for the first time since a testy phone call in January . _____ Image Credit Pool photo by Francis Malasig • No U.S. Navy ship has gone within 12 miles of any of the disputed islands in the South China Sea since President Trump took office, Pentagon officials said. The decision to avoid the area comes as the Trump administration looks to President Xi Jinping of China for help in dealing with North Korea. But fundamental strategic differences are likely to undermine any personal ties Mr. Trump says he has forged with the Chinese leader, our correspondent writes. _____ Image Credit Shizuo Kambayashi/Associated Press • Article 9 of Japan’s Constitution calls for the complete renunciation of war. Prime Minister Shinzo Abe has announced a plan to change it. Mr. Abe’s plan comes as Japan steps up its show of military force amid concerns over North Korea. _____ Image Credit Pool photo by Thomas Peter • “There is a scramble to win over the heart and mind of President Duterte.” That’s what one analyst said after President Xi Jinping spoke with President Rodrigo Duterte of the Philippines spoke by phone just days after President Trump placed a similar call. Separately, lawmakers in the Philippines rejected the woman Mr. Duterte appointed as acting environment secretary. _____ Image Credit Kim Hong-Ji/Reuters • Voters in both South Korea and France will head to the polls soon. The final round of voting in the French presidential race happens Sunday . In South Korea, the election is May 9. The French candidates — the pro-Europe Emmanuel Macron and the far-right populist Marine Le Pen — met in a televised debate . Here’s a look at the leading candidates in South Korea . Above, politicians last month in Seoul. _____ Image Credit David Maurice Smith for The New York Times • From the suburbs of Sydney , we bring you an uplifting story about refugees and a basketball club, the Savannah Pride . Some of the members, who fled South Sudan’s civil wars years ago, are being recruited to play for elite schools in the U.S. The gym that hosts the club has become an enclave unto itself. “It’s brought me brothers. It’s brought me fathers,” said a coach. Business Image Credit Joe Castro/Australian Associated Press, via Reuters • Journalists at two of Australia’s biggest papers began a weeklong strike after Fairfax Media said it would cut 125 jobs at The Sydney Morning Herald and The Age. • HNA Group, a secretive Chinese conglomerate with ties to the Communist Party, became the biggest shareholder in Deutsche Bank. Here’s what we know about this emerging global deal maker. • A U.S. auto boom might be history. A fourth straight monthly sales decline is putting a dent in automakers’ shares. “The market is tapped out,” one dealer said. • The maiden flight of China’s 158-seat C919 passenger aircraft , the country’s rival to Airbus and Boeing, is scheduled for Friday. • U.S. stocks were weaker . Here’s a snapshot of global markets . In the News Image Credit Omar Sobhani/Reuters • In Afghanistan, at least eight civilians were killed and three U.S. soldiers wounded when a suicide bomber attacked an American military convoy in Kabul. [ The New York Times ] • James B. Comey , the F.B.I. director, said any suggestion he affected the outcome of the U.S. presidential election made him “mildly nauseous.” [ The New York Times ] • North Korea confirmed it was holding an American citizen who was detained while trying to leave the country. [ The New York Times ] • An Australian man’s detention in the U.S. has been the subject of global attention, but the details are more complicated than first reported. [ The New York Times ] • In Perth, a Taiwanese delegation was ejected from a meeting hosted by Australia’s foreign minister after Chinese delegates disrupted proceedings. [ The Sydney Morning Herald ] • Another viral video of an airline fracas: An American man who started a fistfight on a flight about to leave Tokyo has been charged with assault. [ The New York Times ] • Some judges in India are taking action against their rivals by ordering them to undergo court-mandated mental health evaluations. [ BBC ] • A band of Thai protesters stands in the way of China’s plan to blast open more of the Mekong River for cargo ships. [ Reuters ] Smarter Living Image Credit Branden Camp/Associated Press • Feeling intellectually under-stimulated? Here’s how to foster great conversations . • Fear gets in the way of finishing our pet projects, or pursuing our passions. Learn to work with it. • Recipe of the day: For diner-style hamburgers , get out a sturdy spatula. Noteworthy Image Credit Photograph by Gillian Laub for The New York Times • Women from the Philippines now dominate home care in Israel — but many still feel invisible. • China’s leaders have beamed about a state campaign to plant trees , but a new study suggests that official estimates overstated its successes, and even mistook shrubs for forests. • A report found that 125 people or families seeking asylum in the U.S. were turned back at entry points — a violation of international law. Back Story Image Credit US Navy, via /Associated Press When President Trump appears with Prime Minister Malcolm Turnbull of Australia to honor the 75th anniversary of the Battle of the Coral Sea , they’ll be on the deck of the Intrepid. Let’s take a moment to examine the battle and the ship, a former Navy aircraft carrier docked in the Hudson River. Intrepid fought in World War II — scars from Japanese kamikaze attacks led to its nickname, the U.S.S. Decrepit — but not in the battle being commemorated this week. The ship later served in the Vietnam War, on NATO missions and as the recovery ship for the Gemini and Mercury space missions. It became a museum in 1982 and a National Historic Landmark in 1986. In the Battle of the Coral Sea, fought this week in 1942, U.S. and Australian forces drove back the Japanese and stopped an invasion of Australia. It was the first air-sea battle and a strategic victory for Allied forces. An American sailor, Otis G. Kight, described the fighting : “Up to the time of Coral Sea, I had only read in Hemingway’s novels about “the sweet smell of death.” The area was a full disaster, and I realized what the “sweet smell of death” really was. There were parts and particles; some ship, some shipmate.” _____ This briefing was prepared for the Asian morning. We also have briefings timed for the Australian , European and American mornings. You can sign up for these and other Times newsletters here . Your Morning Briefing is published weekday mornings and updated online. What would you like to see here? Contact us at asiabriefing@nytimes.com . Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              