   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Sports Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Sports Briefing Tiger Woods Will Miss the U.S. Open, Extending His Absence June 7, 2016 For the third time in six years, the United States Open will go on without the three-time champion Tiger Woods. Woods wrote on his website Tuesday that he is not ready for tournament competition and will skip the Open next week at Oakmont, along with his Quicken Loans National the next week at Congressional. Woods, who won the Open in 2008, 2002 and 2000, first missed the event in 2011, when he was recovering from leg injuries. He missed it in 2014 while recovering from back surgery. Woods has not played since finishing in a tie for 10th in the Wyndham Championship last August. He had two more operations on his back in September and October. U.S. Open Qualifying Luke Donald earned a spot in the United States Open after a six-man playoff in an Ohio qualifier. Donald is a former world No. 1 who has been eligible for every U.S. Open since 2005. In Tennessee, David Toms was among 10 players who made it through. Toms, who tied for fifth at Oakmont in 2007, will be playing his 19th U.S. Open. PRO BASKETBALL Liberty’s Cash Will Retire After Season Liberty forward Swin Cash, a 15-year W.N.B.A. veteran, announced that this would be her final season. She was the second pick in the 2002 draft by the Detroit Shock, behind Sue Bird, winning two league titles with Detroit (2003 and 2006) and one with the Seattle Storm (2010). She also won two Olympic gold medals and two N.C.A.A. championships at UConn. Cash, who is 14th in league history in scoring and 10th in rebounding, is averaging 5.8 points and 3.3 rebounds in four games this season. Liberty Fall to Perfect Sparks Jantel Lavender scored a season-high 22 points as the host Los Angeles Sparks beat the Liberty, 100-77, to remain unbeaten. Los Angeles (8-0) is one win away from tying a franchise record for most consecutive wins to start a season. Nneka Ogwumike had 18 points and 10 rebounds for Los Angeles, which built a 51-38 halftime lead and went ahead by 30 in the second half. Shavonte Zellous scored 12 points and Kiah Stokes added 11 for the Liberty (4-4). Referees Object to Public Scrutiny The National Basketball Referees Association asked the N.B.A. to stop issuing reports that analyze the accuracy of calls from the last two minutes of tight games. In those crunch-time situations, according to the N.B.A., referees make the correct call on 96.2 percent of whistled plays and 87.2 percent of all plays. Just five days after Commissioner Adam Silver backed the public reports as a way to show transparency, the officials’ union said the reports harm referees and the sport by creating hostile environments and that there is no evidence reports have helped create more trust with fans. (AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE) Raptors Extend Coach’s contract Toronto Raptors Coach Dwane Casey signed a three-year extension after steering the team to a franchise-record 56 wins in the regular season and its first berth in the Eastern Conference finals. OLYMPICS Russian Medalists Test Positive for Steroids The “B” samples of two Russian women’s weight-lifting medalists from the 2008 Beijing Olympics have come back positive for steroids, according to Russian state news agency Tass. Marina Shainova, who won silver in the 58-kilogram class, and Nadezhda Evstyukhina, the bronze medalist in the 75-kilogram division, were among 10 Russian medalists from Beijing who reportedly tested positive last month in a reanalysis of their stored samples. Shainova’s coach, Vladimir Shainov, told Tass that the two lifters have now tested positive for turinabol in their “B” samples. The International Olympic Committee can now open a formal doping case, and the two could be stripped of their medals. BASEBALL Machado Retaliates With a Punch Kansas City starter Yordano Ventura ignited a bench-emptying fray by hitting Manny Machado with a pitch as the host Baltimore Orioles extended the Royals’ losing streak to a season-high six games with a 9-1 rout. Ventura and Machado exchanged words in the second inning after two inside pitches, and in the fifth, Ventura drilled Machado in the back with a 99-mile-per-hour fastball. An instant after the ball hit him, Machado charged the mound, landing a solid punch before Ventura tackled him to the ground. Both players were ejected. Around the Majors Ian Kinsler drove in the winning run with a 10th-inning single as the host Detroit Tigers beat the Toronto Blue Jays, 3-2. Blue Jays starter Aaron Sanchez struck out a career-high 12 and took a one-hitter into the ninth. Joey Votto homered in the ninth to power the host Cincinnati Reds to a 7-6 victory over the St. Louis Cardinals, who blew a five-run lead for the second straight day. SOCCER Georgia Shocks Spain in Final Tune-Up Spain, which is No. 6 in the FIFA rankings, lost to No. 137-ranked Georgia at home, 1-0, in its final warm-up before heading to France to defend its back-to-back European Championship titles. Spain dominated from the start but failed to capitalize on its scoring chances. The Georgian midfielder Tornike Okriashvili scored in the 40th minute after a bad pass by Jordi Alba led to a counterattack. Spain’s coach, Vicente del Bosque, used a team similar to the one expected to start against the Czech Republic on Monday in Toulouse, France. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page B 12 of the New York edition with the headline: Woods’s Long Absence Extends to U.S. Open . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              