   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Soccer Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Bundesliga and Premier League Teams Collide in Champions League Draw By  Andrew Das Aug. 28, 2014 A top-heavy UEFA Champions League increasingly dominated by the same top clubs from the same top leagues is finding it increasingly hard to keep them away from one another. As usual, Europe’s top leagues dominated Thursday’s draw for the group stage of the competition, with Spain, England and Germany each providing four of the final 32 teams. That gathering of usual suspects produced three repeat collisions of German and English contenders: Manchester City and Bayern Munich will meet in the group stage for the second year in a row, as will Arsenal and Dortmund and Chelsea and Schalke. Real Madrid, which won its record 10th Champions League title in May, was drawn into a group with England’s Liverpool, a five-time winner, for the group stage , which begins with matches on Sept. 16 and 17. Still, Real Madrid and Liverpool, which is returning to the Champions League for the first time since 2009-10, will be pleased with a group that includes Switzerland’s F.C. Basel and Ludogorets of Bulgaria, which is playing in the group stage for the first time. Bayern Munich and Manchester City will be less pleased to find themselves matched not only against each other but also against Roma of Italy and CSKA Moscow. “Bayern and Manchester City again? You’re kidding me!” CSKA midfielder Alan Dzagoev told UEFA.com. Arsenal, in the group stage for the 17th year in a row, was drawn against Dortmund in three of the past four seasons, part of a difficult group that also includes Turkey’s Galatasaray and the Belgian champion Anderlecht. The draw was especially painful for Ajax Amsterdam, which was drawn into a so-called group of death for the third year in a row. Ajax will play Barcelona and Paris St.-Germain, though it will be able to commiserate about its bad fortune with Apoel of Cyprus, the fourth team in the group. P.S.G.'s star striker, Zlatan Ibrahimovic, previously played for both Barcelona and Ajax. “When our goal is to reach the next stage, it is tough when you draw Barcelona and Paris Saint-Germain,” Ajax Coach Frank de Boer told reporters. Only the top two teams in each four-team group will advance to the knockout rounds next year. The final is June 6 in Berlin. The groups: Group A: Atlético Madrid, Juventus, Olympiacos and Malmo of Sweden. Group B: Real Madrid, Basel, Liverpool and Ludogorets of Bulgaria. Group C: Benfica, Zenit-St. Petersburg, Bayer Leverkusen and A.S. Monaco. Group D: Arsenal, Dortmund, Galatasaray and Anderlecht. Group E: Bayern Munich, Manchester City, CSKA Moscow and Roma. Group F: Barcelona, P.S.G., Ajax and Apoel. Group G: Chelsea, Schalke, Sporting Lisbon and Maribor of Slovenia. Group H: Porto, Shakhtar Donetsk, Athletic Bilbao and BATE of Belarus. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page B 14 of the New York edition with the headline: Champions Draw Has Familiar Matchups . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              