   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Pro Basketball Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Fright Nights in the N.B.A. Image Visiting N.B.A. players have reported inexplicable creaks, groans and bathroom shenanigans at the Skirvin Hilton Hotel in Oklahoma City. Credit Photo Illustration by Eric Bloemers By  John Branch April 19, 2014 OKLAHOMA CITY — The roster of the Oklahoma City Thunder has championship-caliber talent, but the team’s playoff hopes may rest — though not in peace — with one bit player who remains largely unseen. She is an apparitional sixth man, of sorts, who may or may not exist at all, in this world or any other. But Effie the housekeeper has been known to play wicked defense and haunt Thunder opponents, most of whom stay at the 103-year-old Skirvin Hilton Hotel. Large men unafraid of attacking the lane, diving headfirst into the seats or lobbing pressure-packed shots shudder at the mere thought of Effie. More important, perhaps, they lie awake the night before a game, their prescribed rest undone by phantom pains. Is it any wonder that the Thunder had the league’s second-best home record? In the past few seasons, the Knicks blamed creaks and groans for a sleepless night before a loss. A Bulls player could not explain why his bathroom door slammed shut. A member of the Phoenix Suns woke to find his bathtub filled with water. “Everyone in the league knows about her,” said Caron Butler, a 12-year N.B.A. veteran who stayed at the Skirvin many times before he joined the Thunder this season. “Hopefully, she’ll haunt all the teams that come for the playoffs.” The legend holds that Effie was a housekeeper during the early years of the Skirvin, a luxury downtown hotel, before its 10 brick floors were expanded to 14 in 1930. W. B. Skirvin, the hotel’s widowed owner, supposedly had an affair with Effie and, when she became pregnant, ordered her to stay locked inside a room on an upper floor, even after she had the baby. At some point, the story goes, Effie went crazy, grabbed the baby and jumped, killing herself and the child. These days, Effie is considered a playful prankster, knocking on doors, opening drawers and causing commotion in the halls. She propositions men with her voice or appears alongside them in the shower. Sometimes, she pushes a baby carriage in the hallways. Most haunting, perhaps, is the sound of the baby, heard but not seen, crying in the night. Image The two-story lobby of the 103-year-old Skirvin Hilton Hotel in Oklahoma City. Credit Jim Beckel/The Oklahoman One problem. “I don’t think Effie exists,” said Steve Lackmeyer, a reporter for the newspaper The Oklahoman who co-wrote a book, “Skirvin,” about the hotel’s colorful history. That past includes the mysterious death of its first general manager, but years of research have found no record of a housekeeper named Effie, or of any housekeeper who leapt to her death, with or without a baby. “If you had a maid suffer a bloody ending, it would not have been kept quiet,” Lackmeyer said. “This was a small town.” Still, it is not unlike countless ghost stories retold about old hotels around the country. What makes the Skirvin different is that the most notable tellers — and victims — of its supposed haunting are N.B.A. players. The phenomenon seems to have begun in January 2010, when some of the Knicks said that a loss in Oklahoma City could be blamed, in part, on a restless night at the Skirvin. “The place is haunted,” Jared Jeffries told The Daily News. “It’s scary.” His teammate Eddy Curry said he slept just two hours one night. He was the only player assigned to the supposedly spooky 10th floor, and he spent most of his time in Nate Robinson’s room, afraid to be alone. “I definitely believe there are ghosts in that hotel,” Curry told The Daily News, which illustrated its article with a photograph not of the Skirvin but of the Bates Motel. Weeks later, Chicago’s Taj Gibson said that his bathroom door at the Skirvin had slammed in the middle of the night for no reason. His teammate Derrick Rose was among the Bulls who heard strange bangs and bumps and became a believer. “It was scary last night,” Rose said. A legend was reborn. At least one Facebook account opened, named, “Put Kobe in Effie’s Room at the Skirvin.” That spring, the basketball commentator Craig Sager did a cheeky bit on the hauntings. (The piece temporarily took the attention off Sager’s loud sports jackets and onto his bare legs as he climbed into a Skirvin bed and hid beneath the sheets.) Bill Simmons of ESPN wrote about a fitful night at the Skirvin, startled awake by a baby crying somewhere in his room, he thought. In 2012, Jordan Hamilton of the Denver Nuggets shared his thoughts from Oklahoma City on Twitter, writing, “This hotel creeps me out every time we come here.” In 2013, Wesley Johnson of the Phoenix Suns said he awoke to find his bathroom door closed and his tub inexplicably filled with water. The Skirvin prefers not to talk much about any of this. Past management teams have been told to dismiss the rumors. “The position that the hotel has had and continues to have is that we don’t discuss the lore, the myths or the legends,” General Manager Brett Sundstrom said. He has been at the Skirvin since November and has heard no teeth-chattering tales from frightened guests or workers, he said. The hotel sat eerily vacant for nearly 20 years before it was renovated and reopened as a Hilton in 2007, a year before the Thunder arrived as transplants from Seattle. John Williams was the hotel’s general manager for its reopening, through 2010, and now oversees the neighboring Colcord Hotel. “I’ve never believed there was a ghost at the Skirvin,” he said. Employees know all about the legend, though, greeting inquiries with a smile. (The hotel is known for its service, after all.) Some laugh it off as nothing but a story; others insist it is true. One banquet worker said she sometimes heard a crying baby, mostly in the basement or on the 10th and 14th floors. It is not scary, she said, because it is something she only hears, not sees. The origins of such stories are hard to trace. Lackmeyer said the tales had bounced around Oklahoma City for decades. In 1999, The Oklahoman wrote about a “seductive maid” and a crying infant roaming the halls, and it mentioned Effie’s name in a Halloween article about local haunts in 2008. The first written accounts about her may date to the mid-1990s, while the hotel was closed and its future in doubt, when someone posted an account on a website about haunted places. Image Employees know all about the legend of a housekeeper’s ghost. Credit Sue Ogrocki/Associated Press That person may have been Jason Gammon, who retold the story in 2010 on his haunt-centric site, the Demoniacal. Gammon, 37, said that he and friends, 20 years ago, frequently loitered at the parking garage next door to the hotel, where they befriended an elderly security guard for the shuttered property. It was the guard, Gammon said, who told the story about a young woman whom people called Effie, though Gammon remembered the guard saying that her real name was Julia. The story that Gammon shared was that Effie and the baby fell from the window of Room 832, on the front side of the hotel, though the pervasive story today is that it was from the 10th floor. Today, after renovations that expanded the size of the rooms and reduced their number to 225 from about 500, there is no Room 832. The stories rattled mostly through cyberspace, until the Knicks brought them to life four years ago. Now similar stories are spreading across the league. In March, members of the San Antonio Spurs complained about being spooked at the Claremont Hotel in Berkeley, Calif., the night before a game against the Golden State Warriors. “Creepy,” Jeff Ayres told The San Antonio Express-News. “I really heard voices and a baby in the room, and there wasn’t anybody in there. It was crazy.” Maybe it is not the hotels, but the basketball players. “Athletes are very superstitious,” Sundstrom, the Skirvin general manager, correctly pointed out. The Skirvin is part of a group of hotels operated by Marcus Hotels. Another is the Pfister Hotel in Milwaukee, which creates a similar bit of unease among some baseball players. The Skirvin is as popular as ever. Its triple 14-story brick towers majestically anchor the east side of downtown, at the corner of Broadway and Park Avenues. Its rooms were sold out on Tuesday, the last available going for $300 each. Each night, the two-story lobby, with its forest of dark-wood columns and rich tones, was filled with sounds of conversation and melodies from the piano bar. The Skirvin’s restored elegance makes it easy to imagine an era when the clientele included oilmen, actors and presidents. Now its most famous clients are most of the N.B.A. teams, including Oklahoma City’s first-round opponent, the Memphis Grizzlies. They will have their hands full, guarding Oklahoma City’s formidable roster. Nowhere on that list is the ever-evasive role player named Effie. But the Grizzlies might see her, anyway. They planned to stay, as usual, at the Skirvin. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page SP 1 of the New York edition with the headline: Fright Nights in N.B.A. . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              