   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Sports Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Sports Briefing Rashaan Salaam’s Family Declines to Test His Brain for Trauma Image Kento Sakuyama of Japan during his qualification jump on the opening day of the 65th Four Hills Tournament ski jumping event in Oberstdorf, Germany. Credit Adam Pretty/Getty Images Dec. 29, 2016 The family of the 1994 Heisman Trophy winner Rashann Salaam, who killed himself earlier this month, declined to have his brain tested to determine whether his depression had been linked to head trauma from his days as a player. Salaam, 42, was found dead on Dec. 5 in a park near the University of Colorado, where he starred as a running back from 1992 to 1994. The Boulder County Coroner’s Office confirmed Thursday that Salaam had died from a self-inflicted gunshot wound. Salaam’s family said he had had a history of depression and “recent life stressors,” the coroner’s report said. But Salaam’s family did not consent to tests that would have revealed whether he had previously sustained chronic head trauma. Salaam was Muslim, and Islam prohibits bodies from being defiled after death. Repeated blows to the head have been linked to a degenerative brain disease called chronic traumatic encephalopathy. C.T.E. first garnered attention several years ago after it was found in the brains of retired N.F.L. players who had killed themselves. Salaam was the runaway Heisman winner in 1994 and was selected in the first round of the N.F.L. draft by the Chicago Bears. He rushed for 1,074 yards and 10 touchdowns in his first season and was named the N.F.C. rookie of the year. But Salaam’s career was cut short by injuries. He scored only three rushing touchdowns in the next two years in Chicago and played his final N.F.L. game with Cleveland in 1999. TANNEHILL THROWS Miami quarterback Ryan Tannehill will not play in the Dolphins’ regular-season finale against New England, but he returned to the practice field with his teammates and could be back in the postseason. Tannehill has missed the last two games with strained ligaments in his left knee. He wore a brace and threw passes on the side but did not take part in team drills. Coach Adam Gase said Tannehill would rejoin the lineup only when Gase was confident that Tannehill would not be risking further injury. COLLEGE FOOTBALL South Florida Wins in Overtime Quinton Flowers ran for three touchdowns and threw for two more to lead No. 25 South Florida past South Carolina, 46-39, in overtime in the Birmingham Bowl in Birmingham, Ala. South Florida squandered a 39-21 lead, and with 1 minute 11 seconds remaining in the game, South Carolina tied the score on A. J. Turner’s 1-yard touchdown run and a 2-point conversion. But Flowers threw a 25-yard touchdown pass on the first play of overtime, and South Florida’s defense then recovered a fourth-down fumble on the next possession to send the Bulls to their program-record 11th win of the year. Flowers, who was named the game’s most valuable player, completed 23 of 32 passes for 261 yards and ran for 105 yards on 21 carries. SKIING Shiffrin Storms to Another Win Mikaela Shiffrin of the United States won her third World Cup race in three days, dashing off a spectacular final run to win the night slalom at Semmering, Austria. Shiffrin, the slalom gold medalist at the 2014 Olympics in Sochi, had won two giant slalom events in the past two days before overcoming a 0.33-second deficit at her final split to capture her 23rd career victory in the slalom. Shiffrin has won all 12 World Cup slaloms she has competed in since February 2015. She sat out five races with a knee injury last season, a layoff that cost her the season title in slalom, which she had won the previous three years. MILLER’S FUTURE Sasha Rearick, the United States ski team coach, said that Bode Miller would not travel to Europe for training next month, though he could still return to racing next season. Miller, a six-time Olympic medalist, has not raced since severing his right hamstring tendon in February 2015. But injury is not the only factor clouding Miller’s future: Under a 2015 agreement signed with his former sponsor, Head, Miller agreed not to use other skis in World Cup or world championship races for two years. Miller would be free to race on skis by Bomber, which he helped develop, next season and at the 2018 Olympics in Pyeongchang, South Korea, when he will be 40. HOCKEY Rangers Lose a Lead but Still Win Matt Puempel got two of his three power-play goals late in the third period to help the visiting Rangers avert a collapse and beat the Arizona Coyotes, 6-3. Puempel scored 2:24 into the game. Nick Holden and Chris Kreider then added goals as the Rangers built a 3-1 lead in the second period. Arizona rallied to tie the score at 3-3 on Tobias Rieder’s goal 7:32 into the third, but Puempel restored the Rangers’ lead with 5:20 left. After a goal by J. T. Miller with 26.7 seconds left put the Rangers up by 5-3, Puempel completed his hat trick with 16.7 seconds left. BLUE JACKETS’ STREAK AT 14 Alexander Wennberg had two goals to lead the Columbus Blue Jackets over the host Winnipeg Jets, 5-3, and extend their franchise-record winning streak to 14 games. Columbus’s streak is three wins shy of the record set by Pittsburgh in 1992-93. But to extend it any further, the Blue Jackets will have to get past the league’s other hottest team: the Minnesota Wild, which scored three goals in an 80-second span against the visiting Islanders and won, 6-4, to stretch their winning streak to 12 games. UNITED STATES ADVANCES Colin White and Troy Terry scored second-period goals, Tyler Parsons had 25 saves, and the United States beat Russia, 3-2, to earn a quarterfinal spot at the world junior hockey championship in Toronto. Clayton Keller also scored for the United States, which improved to 3-0-0 to sit atop Group B. In Group A in Montreal, Sweden beat Finland, 3-1, to improve to 3-0-0 and win the group. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page B 10 of the New York edition with the headline: Salaam’s Brain Will Not Be Tested for Chronic Trauma . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              