   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index U.S. Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Joseph B. Keller, Mathematician With Whimsical Curiosity, Dies at 93 Image Joseph B. Keller in 1978. He figured out why a jogger’s ponytail swings from side to side and what makes teapots drip. Credit Paul R. Halmos, Archives of American Mathematics, University of Texas at Austin By  Sam Roberts Sept. 16, 2016 Joseph B. Keller, an honored mathematician who figured out what makes a jogger’s ponytail swing from side to side, why teapots dribble, how earthworms (but not snakes) can wriggle even on glass and, in his spare time, whether underwater nuclear tests could set off tsunamis, died on Sept. 7 at his home in Palo Alto, Calif. He was 93. The cause was kidney cancer, according to Stanford University , where he was professor emeritus of mathematics and of mechanical engineering. With a restless curiosity, Professor Keller delved into practical and often playful enigmas, developing mathematical formulas to explain a wide range of contingencies, from the esoteric to the everyday. He applied mathematic theories, for example, in analyzing the ranking of sports teams and the popularity of web pages. He invoked a theory of queues to explain why adding just a few more flights at an airport delays so many others. Suppose, he said, that 10 planes are circling an airport waiting to land. Suppose that one plane lands every minute and that another arrives every minute, joining the queue. That means that in an hour 60 planes land and 60 arrive, and each has a 10-minute wait. None is late. “Now suppose five extra planes arrive, so that 15 planes are waiting,” Professor Keller said. “Then each will have a 15-minute wait. A plane with a 15-minute wait is counted as a late arrival. Adding just five planes in one hour increases late arrivals from 0 to 60.” A recipient of the prestigious Wolf Prize in Mathematics , the National Medal of Science and other honors, Professor Keller was best known for his geometrical theory of diffraction , developed while he was teaching at New York University. The theory, grounded in research into the sonar detection of submarines and underwater explosive mines during World War II, explained how acoustic, electromagnetic and other waves traveled, bouncing off objects and even bending around corners. Even more, he showed how the theory could be applied in a practical way to sonar and radar, antenna design and stealth technology (like missile nose cones shaped to defy detection). Joseph Bishop Keller was born in Paterson, N.J., on July 31, 1923. His father, Isaac Keiles — whose name, he said, was changed when he arrived in the United States — was a Russian refugee who fled pogroms against Jews. He sold liquor wholesale during Prohibition and later opened a bar. Professor Keller’s mother, Sarah, was born in England after her family had fled Russia, and was the bar’s bookkeeper. Joseph Keller competed on the math team at East Side High School in Paterson. He was inspired by his father, who challenged him and his younger brother, Herbert, who also became a mathematician, with number puzzles at dinner. Joseph earned a bachelor’s degree in math and physics from New York University in 1943, followed by a master’s and a doctorate there. He remained at N.Y.U. and became a math professor. He joined the Stanford faculty in 1979 and was named professor emeritus in 1993. He is survived by his wife, Alice Segers Whittemore, a professor of epidemiology and biomedical data science at the Stanford School of Medicine; two children, Sarah and Jeffrey Keller, from his first marriage, to the former Evelyn Fox, which ended in divorce; two stepdaughters, Gayle Whittemore and Margot Palermo; and 10 grandchildren and step-grandchildren. Some of Professor Keller’s conclusions may seem deceptively simple, given the abstruse mathematical equations he constructed to reach them. When the United States was testing atomic weapons at Bikini Atoll in the Pacific beginning in 1946, he predicted correctly that the shock waves from explosions would dissipate without causing far-flung tsunamis. As for the jogger’s ponytail, he concluded that it swings from side to side instead of up and down because the jogger’s vertical motion is unstable. In a paper titled “ Ponytail Motion ,” before demonstrating his findings with mathematical formulas, he wrote: “The ponytail of a running jogger sways from side to side, but the jogger’s head generally does not move from side to side. The head just moves up and down, so the ponytail also moves up and down with it. But, as we shall show, this vertical motion of the hanging ponytail is unstable to lateral perturbations. The resulting lateral motion, the swaying, is an example of parametric excitation, a phenomenon which is common in oscillating mechanical and electrical systems.” Professor Keller found that teapots drip not because of surface tension on the pot but because of principles of liquid flow and air pressure. “It is simply that at the pouring lip, the pressure in the liquid is lower than the pressure in the surrounding air,” he told an interviewer , “so air pressure pushes the tea against the lip and against the outside of the spout.” (To avoid teapot drip, he advised against putting too much water in the pot. “Tea from a less full pot will flow with greater velocity,” he said. “The faster the flow, the less likely it is that the tea will cling to the lip.”) For the teapot and ponytail discoveries, he was given, in each case, an Ig Nobel Prize (as in ignoble), awarded by Harvard and Radcliffe students for “achievements that first make people laugh, then make them think.” Professor Keller also learned that an earthworm moves by sending waves of expansion and contraction along its body, while a snake, which has a backbone, needs friction to propel itself. He tackled brain twisters in virtually every scientific domain. “First of all, I have to understand the phenomenon, so that limits me right away,” he told the journal Notices of the American Mathematical Society in 2004. “Then I have to recognize there is a mathematical aspect to it, and I have to be able to make some progress on it.” He was inspired by many professors and mentored many students. But while briefly teaching at Princeton, he said, he encountered Albert Einstein there only twice. “Once I walked past him on the street,” he recalled. “Another time I went to a lecture by Bertrand Russell, and Einstein was in the audience. I fell asleep, but Einstein didn’t. So I figured it was easy for me, and hard for Einstein.” A version of this article appears in print on , on Page D 7 of the New York edition with the headline: Joseph B. Keller, Mixer of Math and Whimsy, Dies at 93 . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              