   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Sports Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Sports Briefing Baylor Falls Flat in Its First Game as No. 1 By  The Associated Press Jan. 11, 2017 Nathan Adrian broke out of a shooting slump with a career-high 22 points, and No. 10 West Virginia beat No. 1 Baylor, 89-68, on Tuesday night in the Bears’ first game in program history as the top-ranked team. Baylor (15-1, 3-1 Big 12) committed a season-high 29 turnovers and never led in its second true road game of the season. West Virginia (14-2, 3-1) started the second half with an 11-3 run and at one point led by 26. KANSAS 81, OKLAHOMA 70 Frank Mason scored 19 of his 28 points in the second half, and No. 2 Kansas rallied to beat host Oklahoma. Josh Jackson scored 16 points for the Jayhawks (15-1, 4-0 Big 12), who have won 15 straight. Rashard Odomes and Kameron McGusty each scored 13 points for the Sooners (6-9, 0-4). VILLANOVA 79, XAVIER 54 Kris Jenkins and Josh Hart each scored 20 points as No. 3 Villanova routed No. 15 Xavier. The host Wildcats (16-1, 4-1 Big East) were dominant in the second half, which they started by making 15 of 20 shots to hand Xavier (13-3, 3-1) its first conference loss. FLORIDA STATE 88, DUKE 72 Xavier Rathan-Mayes scored 18 of his 21 points in the second half, helping No. 9 Florida State beat No. 7 Duke in Tallahassee. Dwayne Bacon and Terance Mann each had 13 points as the Seminoles (16-1, 4-0) set a university record with their 11th straight win. Luke Kennard led Duke (14-3, 2-2) with 23 points. PLAYER’S DEATH RULED A SUICIDE The Cook County, Ill., medical examiner said that Jordan Hankins, a sophomore on the Northwestern women’s team, committed suicide in her dorm room this week. The office released the results of an autopsy a day after the body of Hankins, 19, was found. She was recruited out of Lawrence North High School in Indianapolis and averaged 3.6 points in 11 games this season. PRO BASKETBALL Hawks Prolong the Nets’ Misery Dennis Schroder had 19 points and 10 assists, Dwight Howard added 14 points and 16 rebounds, and the Atlanta Hawks won their season-high seventh straight game with a 117-97 victory over the Nets at Barclays Center. Brook Lopez scored 20 points for the Nets, who have lost seven straight and 12 of their last 13. JAZZ 100, CAVALIERS 92 Gordon Hayward went blow for blow with LeBron James in the second half to help Utah beat Cleveland in Salt Lake City. Hayward had 22 points and went back and forth with James during the decisive third quarter, during which James brought the Cavaliers back from a 15-point halftime deficit before Hayward drove the lead back to 14. BUCKS 109, SPURS 107 Michael Beasley scored a season-high 28 points in place of an ill Giannis Antetokounmpo, and Milwaukee rallied to win at San Antonio. Kawhi Leonard had 30 points for the Spurs. RAPTORS 114, CELTICS 106 DeMar DeRozan scored a season-high 41 points, Kyle Lowry had 24, and host Toronto ended Boston’s four-game winning streak. HOCKEY This Year, All-Star Rosters Play It Straight The rosters for the N.H.L. All-Star Game are brimming with top-shelf talent, although they lack an unusual fan-picked favorite like John Scott. The rookies Auston Matthews and Patrik Laine were among the 40 players selected for the N.H.L.’s All-Star weekend, which will be held Jan. 27-29 in Los Angeles. The game format will again be a three-on-three tournament featuring teams from each of the N.H.L.’s four divisions. The Pacific Division won the tournament last year, but the weekend was dominated by the unlikely story of Scott. A journeyman enforcer, he scored two goals in the tournament and was voted the most valuable player after a grass-roots online campaign by fans to vote him in as a captain. HURRICANES 5, BLUE JACKETS 3 Jordan Staal scored a go-ahead goal on a deflection with 16 minutes 10 seconds to play, and host Carolina beat Columbus, which has a league-best 60 points but has lost three of four. SOCCER Manchester United Nears English Final Manchester United closed in on the final of the English League Cup by beating injury-hit Hull, 2-0, in the first leg of their semifinal thanks to second-half goals by Juan Mata and Marouane Fellaini. The second leg is at Hull on Jan. 26, and United is a huge favorite to reach the final for a ninth time. COSMOS COULD BE ON THE MOVE The Cosmos have a new owner and will most likely be moving from Long Island to New York City. Rocco B. Commisso, chief executive of Mediacom Communications Corporation and a former soccer player at Columbia, bought a majority ownership stake in the team, in the second-tier North American Soccer League, and will become the club’s chairman. The Cosmos have been playing at Hofstra’s Shuart Stadium. Commisso said the team had started discussions to play at MCU Park in Brooklyn, home of the Mets’ Class A team in the New York-Penn League, or at Columbia, which renamed its soccer stadium after him in 2013. WINTER SPORTS Defending Champion Wins a Slalom Frida Hansdotter, the defending World Cup slalom champion, convincingly won the last race in the discipline ahead of next month’s world championships. Hansdotter lost almost four-tenths of a second off her commanding first-run lead but still finished 0.58 of a second ahead of Nina Loeseth in Lachau, Austria. Mikaela Shiffrin, the reigning Olympic champion, posted the fastest second-run time to share third place with Wendy Holdener, 0.78 of a second off the lead. GYMNASTICS 18 Women and Girls Sue Michigan Doctor A Michigan doctor accused of sexually abusing gymnasts was sued by 18 women and girls, the latest legal action over alleged assaults, mostly at his clinic at Michigan State. The lawsuit against Dr. Larry Nassar, Michigan State, U.S.A. Gymnastics and a Lansing-area gymnastics club was filed in federal court in western Michigan. It makes claims of civil rights violations, discrimination and negligence. Rachael Denhollander, a 32-year-old former gymnast, said she was assaulted by Nassar while seeing him for wrist and back injuries at age 15 in 2000. She said she did not file a complaint at the time because she believed her “voice would not be heard.” OLYMPICS Rio Closes Park Used for Games Almost five months after the Rio de Janeiro Olympics ended, another venue is struggling to find a use. Rio’s city hall said that the Deodoro Olympic Park, which was to be used as a park and recreation area after the Games, had been closed. Deodoro was the second-largest venue cluster during the Olympics. It held equestrian, rugby and field hockey events, among others. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page B 10 of the New York edition with the headline: Baylor Falls Flat in Its First Game as No. 1 . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              