   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Pro Basketball Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Raptors 118, Knicks 107 Knicks Fall to Raptors and DeMar DeRozan, the N.B.A.’s Leading Scorer Image Toronto Raptors guard DeMar DeRozan, left, battling with Knicks guard Derrick Rose during the first half. DeRozan scored 33 points in Toronto’s fourth straight victory in meetings between the teams. Credit Nathan Denette/The Canadian Press, via Associated Press By  The Associated Press Nov. 12, 2016 TORONTO — DeMar DeRozan scored 33 points, Norman Powell added 19, and the Raptors defeated the Knicks, 118-107, on Saturday night, Toronto’s fourth straight victory in meetings between the teams. DeRozan, the N.B.A.’s leading scorer, had his eighth game of 30 points or more in nine starts this season, putting him in an exclusive club. In the last 50 years, only Michael Jordan, World B. Free and Tiny Archibald have started a season by registering 30 or more points in eight of the first nine games. Carmelo Anthony had 31 points for the Knicks, while Kristaps Porzingis and Derrick Rose had 21 each. Kyle Lowry finished with 16 points for the Raptors. Led by their superstars, the Raptors and the Knicks went back and forth over the opening 12 minutes, with DeRozan scoring 9 points and Anthony scoring 10. The teams traded the lead 12 times, and the Knicks ended the first quarter on top, 28-24. Kyle Lowry, who finished with 16 points, put the Raptors up by 4 with 1 minute 41 seconds to play on a driving layup. Lucas Nogueira’s two consecutive blocks, on Anthony and then Rose, put Toronto in control. On the next play, DeRozan was fouled on a driving layup and was serenaded with chants of “M.V.P.! M.V.P.!” as he shot the subsequent free throw. The Knicks are 4-9 against the Raptors in their last 13 meetings. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page SP 5 of the New York edition with the headline: N.B.A.’s Top Scorer Burns Knicks . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              