   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Music Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Playlist The Playlist: Bob Dylan’s New Song and Merle Haggard’s Final Recording Image Bob Dylan Credit Chris Pizzello/Associated Press By  Jon Pareles , Ben Ratliff , Jon Caramanica and Nate Chinen May 13, 2016 Every Friday, The New York Times pop critics will weigh in on the week’s most notable new songs and videos — and anything else that strikes them as intriguing — in a new version of the Playlist column. You can listen to this playlist on Spotify here . Like the new format? Let us know at theplaylist@nytimes.com . Bob Dylan, ‘Melancholy Mood’ Bob Dylan - "Melancholy Mood" Credit Video by BobDylanTV When Bob Dylan released an album last year of standards associated with Frank Sinatra, “Shadows in the Night,” it was an intriguing sidebar to his own enormous catalog of songs disrupting Tin Pan Alley’s principles: a ragged voice and a rootsy band in the ruins of long-gone youth and pop’s elegant past. A second standards album, the new “Fallen Angels,” just repeats the gesture with diminishing returns. But “Melancholy Mood,” which was the B-side of Sinatra’s debut single with Harry James and his Orchestra in 1939, executes the gesture convincingly. Over the gently swinging band — which, like James, starts with a full instrumental verse — Mr. Dylan’s voice certainly has the mileage and tatters to put across sentiments like, “All I can see is grief and gloom/Till the crack of doom.” JON PARELES Merle Haggard, ‘Kern River Blues’ Merle Haggard’s final recording, made in his home studio on Feb. 9 — he died on April 6 from complications of pneumonia — is a Jimmie Rodgers-style blues. This was one of Mr. Haggard’s favorite forms, a tight box that nevertheless encouraged freedom: A 12-bar structure that can accommodate changeable phrase lengths and unconventional patterns of lyric repetition. His website says the song is about “memories of leaving Bakersfield in the late ’70s” — Bakersfield, Calif., where he grew up. Like many Haggard songs, it’s about disappointment with the way things are going: The night life is gone, and the Kern River has dried up. “Somebody stole the water,” he sings in a clear but shaky version of his voice; “another politician lied.” It contains what he did best, condensed images and expressions of getting in motion and leaving: “breakfast in the sky,” “donut on a paper,” “kiss an old boxcar goodbye.” Available from merlehaggard.com . BEN RATLIFF AC/DC Featuring Axl Rose in Lisbon, May 7, 2016 The least compelling but most revealing videos captured by fans from the May 7 AC/DC show in Lisbon — the first with Axl Rose serving as frontman — are the ones shot from up close, with the camera fixed mercilessly on Mr. Rose, still hobbled by a broken left foot. In them, Mr. Rose (replacing Brian Johnson, who is suffering from severe hearing loss), is seated, and while Angus Young moves around him doing his signature bent-over kick-shuffle, Mr. Rose howls to the best of his abilities, which, it turns out, are in strong shape. He yelps. He shrieks. He holds notes for ostentatious stretches. The vocal flamboyance Mr. Rose needs in Guns N’ Roses is different from the more direct hollering he does here, but it’s prepared him well. The amateur clips — of songs like “Hell Ain’t a Bad Place to Be,”  “Highway to Hell,”  “Shot Down in Flames” — tend to underscore the directness of his voice and underdeliver the power of the rest of the band, which is a shame, because they’re rather effective as a unit. By “Whole Lotta Rosie,” Mr. Rose is up and about, and the unit looks and sounds like it’s in fifth gear. But it’s less fun when you can’t see the lightning bolt on the bottom of his cast. JON CARAMANICA Grimes, ‘California’ The video clip for Grimes’s “California” isn’t just her latest self-directed costume extravaganza. It’s also an entirely different production of the song — farewell to new wave guitars and synthesizers, hello to keyboard arpeggios and a new, more introspective transparency, at least at first. The song , from her 2015 album “Art Angels,” is both a plaint and a taunt: to recording companies courting her, to fans hating any change, to her own ambivalent pop ambitions. “I get carried away/commodifying all the pain,” she sings. In the video, she dances around as, among other things, a cowgirl singer in red, white and blue; a glittery mermaid; and a figure in gauzy red who’s very overdressed on a multicolored basketball court. But most of the time she’s a woman in an art-girl beret, tending (and dancing through) an artist’s studio full of statuary, unfinished or unsold: “When you get bored of me I’ll be back on the shelf,” she sings. J.P. The Stone Roses, ‘All for One’ Guitar distortion wells up immediately in “All for One,” the first new music in 21 years from the Stone Roses, as the band gears up for its latest reunion tour, which comes to Madison Square Garden on June 30. The song barely updates the band’s 1980s “Madchester” sound, which drew on Merseybeat, psychedelia, the post-punk noisiness of the Jesus and Mary Chain and the dance-music beats of the wild 1980s club scene in Manchester, England. “All for One” leans psychedelic, not funky, with a seesawing guitar riff that soon spins off multiple overdubbed guitars, along with a foot-stomping shuffle beat and lots of 1960s-style effects on Ian Brown’s voice as well as the guitars and drums. The last chorus becomes an overdubbed, very-late-60s chorale before a final buzzy guitar note. It’s a band emulating its younger self emulating music from decades earlier. Meanwhile, in the current political climate, the jolly lyrics strike a jarring isolationist note: “All for one, one for all/If we all join hands, we’ll make a wall.” J.P. Pink, ‘Just Like Fire’ Pink hasn’t just been at home practicing her trapeze act for the last two years, since the end of her most recent arena tour. Or has she? “You just gonna hang around all day?” her husband, Carey Hart, says in the opening moments of her new video, for “Just Like Fire.” The joke is that she is literally hanging, by a harness, as she executes a series of acrobatic twirls. She made “Just Like Fire” for the soundtrack to “Alice Through the Looking Glass,” a fact that the rest of the video makes clear: There’s a mirror-portal, and a giant chessboard, and a Mad Hatter tea party. (Pink’s daughter, Willow Sage, stands in for Alice.) It’s all a nice distraction from the fact that the song — produced by Max Martin, Shellback and Oscar Holter — brings nothing new to Pink’s musical formula. The beat says hip-hop, the strummy guitar says folk-pop and the chorus says “hot adult contemporary.” It’s a sturdy, on-brand effort, and given how long it has been since Pink released a proper new single, that’s wonder enough for now. NATE CHINEN Maximum Rocknroll and Arhoolie Records Two items in this week’s news involved the maintenance of two major repositories of folk music and culture, in the widest sense of the word “folk.” Last Tuesday Ben Sisario reported on Smithsonian Folkways’ acquisition of Arhoolie Records, Chris Strachwitz’s great label for traditional blues, gospel, and Mexican music. (More information at arhoolie.com .) Also this week, Maximum Rocknroll, based in San Francisco, the volunteer-only punk zine published monthly since 1977, began a successful crowdfunding campaign to raise money for the digitization of its archive and preservation of its physical holdings. That would include most of the records it’s reviewed or featured on its weekly radio show , which would be pretty much every punk single you can imagine. “With your support,” reads Maximum Rocknroll’s indiegogo project page, “we can make our record collection — the largest of its kind in the entire world — accessible to anyone with an Internet connection.” (More information at maximumrocknroll.com .) BEN RATLIFF Dave East, ‘All the Way Up (EASTMIX)’ Some genres go through constant cycles of rebirth, but New York hip-hop seems to be in a perpetual state of death, or at least a kind of cryogenic purgatory. When the Terror Squad was at its peak, circa 2004, it was part of the last wave of hardcore mainstream traditionalists. After a decade in the weeds, that sound has been having a comeback — a last gasp? — thanks to rappers like Dave East of Harlem. Here, he bridges the generation gap by adding a verse to “All the Way Up,” the unexpected hit collaboration by the old Terror Squad crewmates Fat Joe and Remy Ma. Over the woozy horn loop by producer Edsclusive, he remembers a time when Terror Squad was on top, and he was preoccupied elsewhere: “When Remy was Terror Squadding with Pun and them/We was in the back room rumbling, no one coming in/Homie kinda arrogant, bet this 40’ll humble him.” J.C. Speedy Ortiz, ‘Death Note’ “Be kind to your bad self,” urges Sadie Dupuis on “Death Note,” a growly, propulsive affirmation by Speedy Ortiz , the ambitious but low-to-the-ground indie-rock band. The track was named after a Japanese manga and anime series, whose conceit involves a notebook with lethal magical powers. Ms. Dupuis twists this into a metaphor for the therapeutic act of writing in the face of depression: “These are all love letters to me,” she sings. And while the sound is thicker and heavier here than on much of “Foil Deer,” Speedy Ortiz’s standout 2015 album, it’s clearly of a piece; it will appear on “Foiled Again,” a four-song digital EP, on June 3. N.C. Celebrating Joe Temperley in Concert Joe Temperley, the gallant Scottish baritone saxophonist, died this week at the age of 86. A veteran of some of the great big bands of the postwar era, he will be remembered for his stint in the late-period Duke Ellington Orchestra — and a subsequent role with the Jazz at Lincoln Center Orchestra, in which he was a founding member. Last spring that band performed a concert in honor of Mr. Temperley, featuring glowing testimonials, select Ellingtonia, and a five-part suite by Wynton Marsalis, “Joe’s Concerto.” The full concert was broadcast by the NPR program Jazz Night in America, and it now stands as a noble tribute, and a good distillation of everything that made Mr. Temperley special. Be sure not to miss his tender delivery of “The Single Petal of a Rose,” which ends the concert in all due finery. N.C. Bobolinks in Finger Lakes National Forest Avian polyphony, a true conference of the birds at first light. Some vamp, some improvise. Don’t miss the rooster at 4:06. ( Listen here .) J.P. Related Coverage The Playlist: Radiohead Returns, and Justin Timberlake Trolls the World May 6, 2016 Image Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              