   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Sports Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Baylor Settles Lawsuit in Sexual Assault Case By  The Associated Press Sept. 6, 2017 A lawsuit filed by a former Baylor student that heightened concerns about sexual assaults by members of the football program has been settled, the latest in a series of claims that the university has tried to put to rest as it seeks to move on under new leadership in its administration and its athletics department. The plaintiff accused the university of violating the federal gender-equity law Title IX in cultivating a climate that helped lead to her rape in 2013 by two former football players, who have since been arrested on sexual assault charges. The lawsuit charged that at least 52 rapes were committed by at least 31 players from 2011 through 2014. The plaintiff and Baylor filed a joint notice of settlement Tuesday in federal court. One of the plaintiff’s attorneys, John Clune, said in a statement that the terms of the settlement were confidential and that his client planned to testify against the two players in criminal proceedings. MARC TRACY MARYLAND QUARTERBACK LOST FOR SEASON Tyrrell Pigrome, Maryland’s starting quarterback, was lost for the season when he tore his right anterior cruciate ligament in the Terrapins’ 51-41 upset of Texas on Saturday. The injury occurred in the third quarter at the end of a run. He was replaced by the freshman Kasim Hill, who will start Saturday against Towson. Pigrome, a sophomore, won the starting job in an intense competition during the summer. He was 9 for 12 for 175 yards and also ran for 64 yards against the Longhorns. SEMINOLES DROP IN POLL Florida State slipped to No. 10 in The Associated Press poll after falling to Alabama and losing quarterback Deondre Francois to a season-ending knee injury. The Crimson Tide are No. 1 again, securing 60 of 61 first-place votes in the first Top 25 poll of the regular season. Ohio State remained No. 2 in the news media poll and received the other first-place vote. The defending champion Clemson moved up to No. 3. Penn State is No. 4, and Oklahoma moved up to No. 5, so there will be a top-five matchup for the second straight week when the Sooners play at Ohio State on Saturday. PRO FOOTBALL No Game in Miami This Weekend The Miami Dolphins’ season opener against the Tampa Bay Buccaneers will not be played in Miami this week but may be moved to a neutral site because of Hurricane Irma, the N.F.L. said. If the game is not relocated, it will be postponed until November, when the teams share a bye week. Kickoff had been scheduled for Sunday at 1 p.m. Eastern, but Irma is forecast to threaten South Florida this weekend. NEWTON SPEAKS UP FOR KAEPERNICK Cam Newton became the latest N.F.L. player to voice his support of the free-agent quarterback Colin Kaepernick, saying it’s “unfair” that he’s not on a roster. Newton, the Carolina Panthers’ starting quarterback, asked and answered a few of his own questions on Tuesday: “Do I think Kaepernick is better than some of these starting quarterbacks in this league? Absolutely. “Should he be on a roster? Absolutely. “Is he good enough to be a starting quarterback? Absolutely.” Newton and the Panthers will play Kaepernick’s former team, the San Francisco 49ers, on Sunday. Some players believe that Kaepernick, who had a better passer rating than roughly half the starting quarterbacks in the league in 2016, has been blackballed by teams for choosing to kneel during the national anthem to protest police violence and social injustice. SOCCER Syria Keeps World Cup Hopes Alive Syria scored deep into stoppage time at Iran to keep alive its hopes of qualifying for the World Cup for the first time amid a civil war at home. With Syria facing elimination from Asian qualifying, Omar al-Soma marked his return to the team after a five-year absence to clinch a 2-2 draw and a place in the playoffs. Players, with “Syria” rather than their names emblazoned across the back of their red jerseys, sank to their knees on the turf in Tehran. From the bench, flag-waving members of the team’s staff streamed onto the field. Back home, the pursuit of a place at next year’s World Cup in Russia has provided a flicker of joy in parts of a country divided by six years of war. Big screens were erected in public squares in the Syrian capital of Damascus for public viewings, and fans packed into coffee shops and sports halls to watch the broadcast from Iran. Thousands of dancing fans filtered onto the streets of Damascus chanting “Syria” and waving the country’s flag, bringing traffic to a complete halt in the city center. “This is the happiest day of my life,” said Bashir Rahal, 26, who was watching the game in a Damascus hotel, with the country’s flag on a table in front of him. Now Syria will have to qualify the hard way for its first trip to the World Cup. Syria will play Australia in a two-match Asian series next month. To make the World Cup, the winner will then have to beat a team from the Concacaf confederation covering North and Central America and the Caribbean. SOUTH KOREA AND SAUDI ARABIA ADVANCE South Korea and Saudi Arabia qualified for the World Cup from Asia. In Group B, Australia beat Thailand, 2-1, in a nervous performance. Needing to boost their goal difference to hold off Saudi Arabia in the standings, the Australians instead missed chance after chance against a much weaker opponent. That left Saudi Arabia needing to win by just one goal against Japan. Fahad Al Muwallad obliged with a fierce strike into the top right corner in the 63rd minute to hand the Saudis a 1-0 win and their first World Cup appearance since 2006. SPAIN AND SERBIA ARE IN CONTROL Spain and Serbia are on the verge of qualifying for the World Cup, while Croatia and Iceland are top of a very tight Group I. Spain followed Saturday’s 3-0 win over Italy by crushing Liechtenstein, 8-0, to remain atop Group G, three points ahead of Italy, which labored to a 1-0 win over Israel. Serbia is similarly in control of Group D after beating Ireland, 1-0, to go four points ahead. Matters are far less clear in Group I, where four teams are separated by just two points with two games left. Croatia, the group leader, and Iceland both have 16 points, while Turkey and Ukraine are just two points behind. The nine group winners automatically advance from European qualifying, with the eight best runners-up going to a playoff round. WIDE OPEN IN AFRICA All five of Africa’s World Cup places are still available and will be claimed only in the last two rounds of games. After six days of qualifiers ended, the most significant development was who won’t be playing in Russia. Cameroon, the African champion, was the first of the 20 teams in the final group stage to be eliminated. Others followed Cameroon out, but 15 of the 20 still have a chance of making it, even if some are long shots. Only the five group winners in Africa will qualify for the World Cup. The best-placed teams are Tunisia, which leads Group A by 3 points; Nigeria, ahead by 3 points in Group B; Ivory Coast, clinging to a 1-point lead in Group C; Burkina Faso and Cape Verde, surprisingly tied at the top of Group D ahead of Senegal and South Africa; and Egypt, which leads Group E. CYCLING Froome Boosts Lead in the Vuelta Chris Froome won the individual time trial to increase his Vuelta a España lead and remain in position to win the race for the first time. Froome, the Tour de France winner, had a dominant performance in the flat 24.9-mile stage from the Navarra Circuit to Logrono in northern Spain, finishing 29 seconds ahead of the Dutch rider Wilco Kelderman and 57 seconds in front of the Italian rider Vincenzo Nibali. In the overall standings, Froome’s lead over Nibali increased to 1 minute 58 seconds. Kelderman moved to third overall, 42 seconds behind Nibali. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page B 12 of the New York edition with the headline: College Football; Baylor Settles Lawsuit in Sexual Assault Case . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              