   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Pro Basketball Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Sixers’ Throwback Anthem Becomes the Soundtrack of a Comeback Image Philadelphia 76ers fans finally have something to cheer for again. Credit Mark Makela for The New York Times By  Scott Cacciola Jan. 4, 2018 PHILADELPHIA — When T. J. McConnell, a reserve guard for the Philadelphia 76ers, was married last summer, his brother and best friend surprised him at the end of the reception. The funky beat of a familiar song filled the room as the dance floor flooded with friends and family. McConnell knew the lyrics by heart: Here they come, Philadelphia, On the run, stand up and cheer! No. 1, Philadelphia, Here they come, team of the year! “Everyone went nuts,” McConnell said. The song was “Here Come the Sixers,” a disco-flavored anthem from 1975 that has become the soundtrack for the N.B.A.’s most precocious team. The 76ers are so young, they might as well take a school bus to their games. But they commemorate their victories by dancing to a song that practically struts down the street in bell-bottoms while shaking a tambourine. “It’s very strange,” said Terry Rocap, 70, a musician who performed on the original recording. “But it’s a good tune. People seem to like it.” The 76ers, under the direction of Scott O’Neil, their chief executive, have been dipping into the franchise’s past even as the team reinvents itself. Chris Heck, their president for business operations, cited the team’s new slate of uniforms, which quilt together several eras: There’s “Phila” lettering from 1960, stars from the 1970s and a collar taken from the jerseys worn by the 76ers during the 1982-83 season, when they last won an N.B.A. championship. “When Scott came in about five years ago, we got together and said, ‘We need to start bringing back what was great about the Sixers,’” Heck said. “Because the heritage is amazing.” Image After years of mounting losses, Sixers fans have been energized by a team of young stars that has a chance to win every night. Credit Mark Makela for The New York Times That heritage also includes “Here Come the Sixers,” which O’Neil hoped to incorporate in recent seasons as a regular part of the game-night experience. But Heck said the rest of the staff voted to reserve it for home wins, which meant that nobody got to hear it much at all. (The Sixers were 10-72 just two seasons ago.) But success-starved fans of the team are optimistic. The 76ers employ several young players who are actually decent at basketball. And despite some recent growing pains, they should contend this season for their first playoff berth since 2012. Victories are hard-earned, though, and “Here Come the Sixers” is still something of a rare treat. “Scott’s always like, ‘I want to hear it more!’” Heck said. “And we’re like: ‘We love it, too. But we have to stay disciplined.’” The song urges fans to “clap your hands” and “stomp your feet” in support of “the team of the year,” which is, of course, the 76ers. For the musicians behind the song, its renaissance has been a pleasant surprise. “We figured the song would just be a fleeting moment of glory,” said Randy Childress, 68, who played bass guitar on the song. “But now it’s going to be on my epitaph.” Image From left, Terry Rocap, Joe Sherwood and Randy Childress didn’t expect the theme song they wrote for Philadelphia in 1975, “Here Come the Sixers,” to still be so popular more than 40 years later. Credit Mark Makela for The New York Times At the time of the song’s creation, Childress was doing odd jobs for the 76ers while he finished his degree at Temple. He recalled that he once earned $500 for dressing up as a turkey at a game before Thanksgiving. A pair of female ushers, clad in pilgrim costumes, led him around. “I did all sorts of stupid stuff,” he said. As for the team itself, the 76ers were on the rise after years of yawn-inducing mediocrity. But Pat Williams, then the general manager, understood the 76ers needed to add some pep to the game-day experience if they were to draw larger crowds to the Spectrum, the team’s arena at the time. “We were trying to create the kind of atmosphere where it was a fun place to come,” he said in a telephone interview. So when Williams learned that Childress was in a rock band, he had an idea: Perhaps the 76ers needed their own theme song. Armed with a new assignment, Childress invited Rocap and a third bandmate named Joe Sherwood to his small apartment, where he had a four-track machine. They hammered out a demo, the original beat set by the steady dribble of a basketball. “Boink, boink, boink, boink,” Childress said. Image Terry Rocap, Joe Sherwood and Randy Childress wrote a victory song for the 76ers in 1975 as part of the team’s effort to provide a better game-day experience for fans. Credit Mark Makela for The New York Times One morning, after watching “Sesame Street” with his 7-year-old daughter, Rocap arrived with lyrics: One, two, three-four-five, Sixers! Ten, nine, eight, 76ers! “And we’re going, ‘Oh, that’s great,’” Childress said. “So that’s where the initial burst came from, and then we built the whole song around it.” The band, known as Fresh Aire, wrote the song in E major, a key at the top of the vocal range for most male tenors. By pushing that range, Sherwood said, the song created energy. And in hopes of protecting its shelf life, over the years the band kept the lyrics free of references to specific players on the team — even the illustrious Julius Erving. Image Joel Embiid has become the face of Sixers success in a season of renewed hope for Philadelphia fans. Credit Mark Makela for The New York Times On the track, the band harmonizes to an accompaniment that includes guitars, piano, bass and drums. Sherwood’s brother Richard gave the song some soul by jamming out on a Hohner Clavinet, a keyboard instrument at the height of cool in the 1970s thanks to Stevie Wonder. “My brother added a little riff,” said Joe Sherwood, 70, who began singing: “Here they come! Deedley deedley deeeee!” Williams, the Sixers’ general manager, appreciated how the song turned out — it was exactly what he wanted, he said — but the team kept its rollout subtle. “It really wasn’t a big deal,” Sherwood said. “There wasn’t any big hoopla or major announcement. They just started playing it.” World B. Free, 64, a former guard who now works as an ambassador for the team, was a first-year player when the song made its debut. Before home games, the song’s first few beats would reach the players as they took the floor. It became an even bigger deal once Erving, known as Dr. J, joined the team the next season. “We’d be coming out of the tunnel and the crowd would be getting juiced up,” Free said. “And then Doc would come out there with that big ol’ Afro and start throwing it down: Boom!” For better or for worse, the song has stuck with Free through the decades. “I hear it in my sleep,” he said. In the wake of “Here Come the Sixers,” other teams reached out to the band to write their theme songs, including one for the N.H.L.’s Washington Capitals called “Clap for the Caps.” But none of them had much staying power. And when Williams left the 76ers organization in 1986, the song more or less left with him. “But it had a good run,” Williams said. Childress, Rocap and Sherwood, meanwhile, spent several years touring and playing at clubs. Sherwood eventually started a recruiting business. Rocap became a professional window washer. Childress, who had studied architecture, began designing exhibits for trade shows and museums. The Sixers’ theme song was largely forgotten until the early 2000s, when it was resuscitated by Angelo Cataldi, a longtime host for Sports Radio 94WIP in Philadelphia. “We were really excited about the team, and we needed a song,” Cataldi said. “So we did some research and we found out there was really only one, and it was this ’70s disco thing, and it was dated and absurd. But that’s kind of our show.” Cataldi now regrets the part he played in keeping “Here Come the Sixers” alive — it’s not his favorite song, he said — but many others seem to have a more favorable opinion. Last season, Joel Embiid, the team’s effervescent center, celebrated a win against the Knicks by dancing to the song with several cheerleaders. Some of his teammates are similarly enchanted by it. “I actually play it all the time,” said McConnell, the 76ers guard. “My friends will be like, ‘Let me hear the song!’ And I’ll put it on.” When Williams, now senior vice president for the Orlando Magic, delivered the keynote address at a prayer breakfast in October, he was surprised by the entertainment: a rendition of “Here Come the Sixers” performed by Childress and Rocap. “I sat there listening, and I couldn’t believe what was happening,” Williams said. “These 700 people were carrying on like it was a Billy Graham crusade.” Williams said the reason for the song’s popularity was no secret. “Everybody likes to tap their toes and clap their hands,” Williams said. “Winning helps, too.” A version of this article appears in print on , on Page B 7 of the New York edition with the headline: Disco in the Air. Hustle on the Floor. . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Related Coverage An N.B.A. Team in Mexico City: How Realistic Is That? Dec. 15, 2017 Image Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              