   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by T.M.Q. — Tuesday Morning Quarterback The Best Teams? Look at the Big Games Image Sure, they lost Sunday night, but Tom Brady and the Patriots are No. 1 in the Authentic Games Index. Credit Justin Edmonds/Getty Images By  Gregg Easterbrook Dec. 1, 2015 In this world of data-driven precision, we’ve come to expect everything to the fifth decimal place. Tuesday Morning Quarterback says there’s still room for totally unscientific back-of-a-cocktail-napkin thinking. Enter my Authentic Games Index. What’s an Authentic Game? You know it when you see it. Usually this means a date against another team that’s playoff-bound. But it depends. I can’t disclose my methodology because I don’t have one. At this point in the 2013 season, my Authentic Games Index forecast a Super Bowl of Seattle versus Denver , and verily it came to pass. At this point in the 2014 season, the Authentic Games metric had a Super Bowl of Arizona versus Denver. But considering Carson Palmer had just been hurt and Peyton Manning’s decline was showing, I unscientifically said the Super Bowl would pit New England versus Seattle . That happened, too. Sure, in both years I was picking good teams. But by December, everyone knows who the good teams are. At this juncture last season, many touts had Dallas and Denver meeting in the Super Bowl. At this juncture two years ago, many liked Niners-Pats for the finale. My two-for-two prediction streak doesn’t prove anything. But it’s not chopped liver, either. Below is the current Authentic Games Index, to be updated weekly through the end of the season. Key consideration: Playing in many pressure-packed Authentic Games, even if losing some, is a positive indicator. So for instance Green Bay’s 4-3 may mean more than Arizona and Atlanta at 3-1, though the latter represents a higher victory percentage. New England: 7-1 Carolina: 5-0 Denver 5-2 Atlanta, Arizona 3-1 Cincinnati 4-2 Green Bay: 4-3 Minnesota 3-2 Giants: 3-3 Kansas City 4-5 Indianapolis 3-4 Jets 2-3 Houston, Seattle 2-4 Buffalo 2-5 Pittsburgh 1-4 Oakland, Washington 1-5 The Patriots may be injury-riddled, but their Authentic number of 7-1 looks very good. And Bill Belichick has demonstrated the ability to ask for volunteers from the audience and win. Till this week, T.M.Q. had been boosting Patriots undrafted center David Andrews for N.F.L. M.V.P. Now that Bryan Stork is healthy and has regained his center job, maybe Andrews will start at linebacker, or wide receiver. Carolina looks very good at an Authentic 5-0. Cam Newton finally has become a franchise quarterback, and a franchise quarterback is essential to Super Bowl success. Luke Kuechly and Thomas Davis are a dynamic duo reminiscent of Mike Singletary and Wilber Marshall. Both stay on the field for passing downs, a good sign. In a league in which coordinators take the blame and are shown the door, Sean McDermott is in his fifth season as Carolina’s defense-meister. By now his players know their roles and assignments, and it shows on the field. Image Cam Newton of the Carolina Panthers, the league's lone unbeaten team (and yes, authentic). Credit Brandon Wade/Associated Press Denver looks strong in Authentic terms. This season may come down to whether the franchise can resist the urge for a Manning comeback, and let Brock Osweiler stand or fall. Arizona looks good statistically but has only four Authentic tests. The Cardinals’ regular season concludes with Green Bay and Seattle: Those games may be an Authentic feast on both sides. The Authentic sleeper is Kansas City. The Chiefs are moyen statistically, but often in the N.F.L. it’s about who’s playing well late, and Kansas City is. In other football news, if the postseason began today, a losing team, Washington, would host a playoff contest while three winning teams — Atlanta, Jersey/B and Pittsburgh — would be sent home. Another reason the N.F.L. should switch to a seeded-tournament format. Damon Runyon Watches ‘Monday Night Football.’ On the final play of “Monday Night Football,” game tied, the Browns lined up to attempt a field goal to win: The Ravens blocked the effort, running it back for a touchdown and victory as time expired. Cleveland is now 2-9 and Baltimore now 4-7; the play meant nothing to the 2015 N.F.L. season. But what happened in the background could mean a lot to the N.F.L.’s future. As the field goal was blocked, bright green FanDuel ads — “One Week Fantasy Football!” — shone on the stadium’s electronic signs. With Cleveland favored by 4 points, traditional betters who wagered on the final score, whether legally in Las Vegas or illegally through bookmakers, did not care about the kick. If it was good and Cleveland won by 3, those who bet on the Browns would lose their wagers anyway, while those who bet on the Ravens would win their wagers even as Baltimore lost the contest. But in the fantasy-stats version of sports betting, a special-teams touchdown is huge. As the Ravens ran back the kick, money changed hands in the fantasy gambling kingdoms. Because football is a complex sport with large numbers of players, it’s hard to throw the outcome of a football game in the way that a baseball game can be thrown via deliberate strikeout or a basketball game thrown by deliberately missing shots. But it’s not inconceivable that football stats could be manipulated to serve the interests of fantasy gambling. The more the National Football League wraps its arms around FanDuel, DraftKings and their imitators, the greater the risk N.F.L. contests will become perceived as fixed. Sweet ‘Lend Me a Tight End’ Plays. A decade ago, it was rare for a tight end to split wide: Today this tactic is so common that it takes two flexed tight ends to merit comment. Hosting Les Mouflons, Cincinnati split star Tyler Eifert right alongside extra tight end Ryan Hewitt. The latter ran a curl, causing the safety in his area to step forward; Eifert blew past for his league-leading 12th touchdown reception. That’s league-leading for all receivers , not just for tight ends. Image Down is up: Bengals tight end Tyler Eifert scoring yet another touchdown. Credit Frank Victores/Associated Press Visiting Denver, the Patriots split star Rob Gronkowski wide left in a trips, and extra tight end Scott Chandler wide right. The Broncos’ secondary was confused about who should cover whom; Denver should have called a timeout. Instead Chandler received a “free release” — no one jammed him — and headed upfield uncovered for a touchdown reception. Earlier, when the 6-foot-6 Gronkowski was split wide, he was covered by the 5-11 defensive back Darian Stewart and made a leaping touchdown catch. This is the matchup — tall tight end split wide against normal-height defensive back — that no contemporary defense knows how to solve. Image Get the latest Tweets from @NYT4thDownBot . Live analysis of every N.F.L. fourth down decision. Sweet Series of Thanksgiving Day. The Bears are in a rebuilding phase, discarding expensive big names like Brandon Marshall and Jared Allen; few gave Chicago a chance at Green Bay. Trailing 17-13, the Packers reached first down at the Chicago 8 with 51 seconds remaining. The fabled Aaron Rodgers-run offense seemed likely to win the contest for the home fans, while T.M.Q. would write an outraged item about Chicago’s fourth-and-1 punt in Packers territory with less than three minutes remaining. (The Upshot’s 4th Down Bot was so upset by that punt that its primary solenoid had to be unwound and refinished.) Green Bay goes incompletion, incompletion, incompletion, incompletion and Chicago wins — the best goal-line stand so far this season. Image The Bears were rewarded for resisting the urge to blitz. Credit Mike Mcginnis/Getty Images On all the snaps, the Bears defensive coordinator Vic Fangio resisted the temptation to blitz — surely what Rodgers hoped Chicago would do. Just a conventional four-man pass rush and tight coverage. Fangio knew that in pressure situations, Mike McCarthy rarely remembers that it’s legal to rush the football. (Chicago held Green Bay to an average of just 4.2 yards gained per pass, while allowing 177 yards rushing with an average of 6.3 yards gained per rush.) That meant getting four “clangs” from four incompletions was Chicago’s objective, which was achieved — sweet as pecan pie with a chocolate crust. As for the Packers, from the point in last year’s N.F.C. title contest at which Green Bay led by 12 points in the fourth quarter, a Super Bowl invite seemingly assured, they are 7-5. The Pack’s current 1-4 stretch is not necessarily fatal, as the schedule offers three straight dates versus losing teams. But Green Bay Packers: time to snap out of it. Stats of the Week. Russell Wilson is 7-0 at home versus the A.F.C. Tennessee is on an 0-11 streak at home. Arizona snapped an 0-6 streak at San Francisco/Santa Clara. Carson Palmer is on a 22-4 streak. Kansas City is on a 5-0 streak during which it has outscored opponents, 160-61. Minnesota leads the league both in rushing yards and in yards per rush. At 4-7, the Eagles are one game out of first in their division. Image Russell Wilson: I'll take more A.F.C. games at home, please. Credit Ted S. Warren/Associated Press Those Kids Today. As graying pundits wring their hands regarding campus protests, it is well to bear in mind that at least as far back as Plato, each aging generation has believed the young are out of whack. When today’s graying pundits were at college, parents were shocked by campus protests. Everything worked out fine, and colleges became better as a result. Most likely this round of protests will improve colleges, too. Of course some of the complaints seem overwrought — can it really be that science and math professors at magnificent Amherst College refuse to listen to correct answers from black students? Protesters at Amherst, Claremont McKenna, Ithaca, Yale and other colleges may be overselling their complaints but also are warning of genuine problems that require solutions. Consider the notion of “microaggression.” This term is much-mocked. On the other hand, minority students know that racial judgmentalism often is expressed in code. At college even the children of privilege are attuned to slight expressions of praise or disdain. If white students who never deal with coded racial affronts can easily be upset in the super-sensitive college milieu, and they can, it’s worse for minority students. Microaggression does not have to be intentional. This Peyton Manning commercial for DirecTV includes “really high voice” Peyton singing “Camptown Races” in a barbershop quartet. To many viewers the scene is just silly fun. An African-American viewer would know that what’s being performed is a minstrel song originally titled “ Gwine to Run All Night, or De Camptown Races .” In the original, blackface performers mocked slaves for saying “gwine” instead of “going,” “dis” rather than “this” and so on. The song is historically significant — college groups should perform it. But an African-American might wince on seeing this song in a Fortune 500 commercial (AT&T owns DirecTV), while a white American would be unlikely to have that reaction. Minority students complaining on campuses today will be among the leaders of the nation in a couple of decades. Society needs to learn to respect their judgment. Deep Questions. Will Kansas City become the first 1-5 team since 1970 to reach the N.F.L. postseason? Will Atlanta become the 14th team to open 5-0 and miss the playoffs? Do a Little Dance . The Tuesday Morning Quarterback law of short yardage holds: Do a little dance if you want to gain that yard! Straight-ahead vanilla runs on short yardage can work, especially the New England action in which the Patriots rush up to the line of scrimmage and quick-snap, before the defense is set, for a Tom Brady sneak. But in general, short-yardage success requires misdirection — a shift, man-in-motion or other little dance to create an instant of hesitation by the defense. Arizona visiting Santa Clara, the Cardinals faced third-and-1 and simply ran straight ahead, no shifts or misdirection, stuffed. Baylor trailing T.C.U. in the second overtime in the rain, the game came down to a fourth-and-1 for the Bears. Baylor went battlecruiser-heavy with seven linemen plus an extra pair of giants in the backfield lined up as fullbacks. Big-college’s leading offense, entering the contest averaging 616 yards and 51 points, simply ran straight ahead without the slightest misdirection. Stuffed, game over. Image Baylor failed to "do a little dance," and so it was T.C.U. fans who wound up shimmying. Credit Tony Gutierrez/Associated Press The Many Layers of N.F.L. Subsidies. Last month, T.M.Q. noted that many N.F.L. teams receive payments from the Pentagon for pretending to be patriotic . Not mentioned in the Senate report is the New England Patriots exhibit hall that’s funded by Raytheon , a defense contractor with headquarters in Massachusetts. Is the defense budget ultimately paying for this, too? Chip Kelly Skedaddle Watch. At 4-7 with a three-game losing streak, all to second-tier teams, Philadelphia is fading fast , as the Go-Gos would say. T.M.Q. continues to think Chip Kelly will skedaddle to the collegiate ranks, where football coaches are little gods and players say naught but “yes, sir.” Image Hmm, maybe I should have traded the whole team. Credit Jose Juarez/Associated Press Are the Eagles’ troubles the result of off-season turbulence? During the off-season, Kelly essentially traded LeSean McCoy, Jeremy Maclin, Nick Foles, Cary Williams, Todd Herremans, Evan Mathis, Trent Cole and high draft selections for Sam Bradford, Kiko Alonso, Byron Maxwell and DeMarco Murray: I may be leaving out a couple dozen players. The roster churn seems to have backfired. Often in 2015, the Eagles have performed like a group of gents who met for the first time in the parking lot just before kickoff. Kelly staged an off-season power play to get General Manager Howie Roseman kicked upstairs. Kelly won control over player personnel while Roseman’s office was moved so the two men wouldn’t see each other in the halls. Becoming de facto general manager, Kelly unloaded players associated with Roseman. That way if there were glorious triumph, all credit would accrue to Kelly. At the Patriots, Bill Belichick is both head coach and de facto general manager. Kelly wanted the same arrangement so that he could bask in Belichick-class glory. Except his personnel decisions have not been Belichick-class. Kelly is accustomed to the collegiate environment, where there is tremendous turnover of starters each year. To him, ripping up the depth chart in the off-season seems normal. At a football factory it almost doesn’t matter who suits up, since advantages in recruiting power and gimmick schedules are so great. The professional reality is that every N.F.L. team is stocked with talent, no one has a gimmick sked, and cohesion is essential. Failure to adjust to this college-pro distinction is a reason many successful football-factory coaches — including Butch Davis, Dennis Erickson, Steve Spurrier — flop at the top. During the Eagles’ turbulent off-season, line star Jason Peters declared the team could have won the Super Bowl if only they hadn’t, ahem, failed to reach the playoffs. Peters’s comment suggests the Eagles were living in a world of make-believe — a world Kelly created, and from which he can skedaddle. Image Eagles tackle Jason Peters, in a land of make-believe. Credit Duane Burleson/Associated Press T.M.Q. Is Looking for Corporate Sponsors for My Proposed Fiasco Bowl. Because there are 40 major bowl games coming, but only 78 big colleges at or above .500, two colleges with losing records will make bowl appearances. Perhaps two losing teams could be paired in the Quick Lane Bowl ; this could generate publicity. The many major bowl games mean 63 percent of Division 1 collegiate teams make a bowl — everybody’s above average! College playoff mania hardly stops there. Here are the Division I-AA brackets , the Division II postseason and the basketball-sized Division III tourney . Bear in mind the reigning Division I college champion is not Ohio State but North Dakota State. The Buckeyes won a privately organized four-school knockout that the N.C.A.A. has nothing to do with; the Bison took the highest-level N.C.A.A.-recognized title. In the hall at N.C.A.A. headquarters in Indianapolis where championship banners hang, North Dakota State’s, not Ohio State’s, is the football flag. Here’s to you , North Dakota State alums. Who Kidnapped Belichick and Replaced Him with That Look-Alike? New England’s offense is riven with injuries while Denver’s defense tops the league. Still it’s hard to puzzle out Bill Belichick’s decision to punt on fourth-and-1 in Denver territory on Sunday night. Just to prove it was no fluke, Belichick later sent in the punter on fourth-and-1 at midfield, and again on fourth-and-3 at midfield. Had the Flying Elvii gone for it at any of these junctures, there’s a strong chance New England would still be undefeated. Stop Me Before I Blitz Again! Seattle leading 32-30, the Seahawks faced third-and-10 on their 20 just before the two-minute warning. All Pittsburgh needs is an incompletion and ... it’s a six-man blitz, 80-yard touchdown pass to Doug Baldwin ices the contest. Baldwin ran a short crossing pattern. Because of the big blitz, there was no safety “above” the Pittsburgh corners; William Gay, the sole safety, quit on the play and stood watching while Baldwin still had 50 yards to run. Pittsburgh’s fourth-ranked offense is cranking out yards, but the Steelers’ 30th-ranked passing defense may be the undoing of this season’s team. In 2011, the Steelers’ secondary allowed 172 passing yards per game; Sunday, it allowed 164 passing yards in the fourth quarter alone. Image Maybe Seahawks Coach Pete Carroll was yelling: Thanks for blitzing! Doug Baldwin races for the game-clinching touchdown. Credit John Froschauer/Associated Press The 4th Down Bot had barely finished initializing its new solenoid when the Steelers, trailing 32-27, kicked on fourth-and-goal at the Seattle 3 late in the fourth quarter. The 4th Down Bot begged to differ : The football gods promptly punished the timid kick with Seattle’s long icing touchdown. Note: T.M.Q. believes that rather than chanting various off-color expressions, unhappy crowds should chant, “We beg to differ!” Rex Ryan Boast of the Week. Back in October, T.M.Q. proposed that “ by Thanksgiving, Rex Ryan may have moved on to boasting about the 2016 season .” Thanksgiving has come and Ryan, whose team is 5-6, appears out of 2015 boasts. Maybe Ryan can figure out a way to boast about being an effective 0-5 on challenges versus Kansas City, throwing the red flag on calls that were correct while not challenging key calls that were clearly wrong . Weasel Coach Watch. T.M.Q.’s Law of Weasel Coaches holds: When you hire a coach who’s only in it for himself, you get a coach who’s only in it for himself. Virginia Tech just replaced the storied Frank Beamer with Justin Fuente of Memphis, who walked out on a five-year contract he signed less than 12 months ago . Nobody put a gun to Fuente’s head and forced him to agree to that December 2014 deal. Fuente, who’s leaving Memphis immediately — good luck in that bowl game, Tigers — breaks his promises to the University of Memphis and to the young men he recruited. In recruiting, most college football coaches preach loyalty and family. Then when dollars are waved, it’s see you later. Virginia Tech faithful: Fuente did not keep his word at Memphis; why assume he will keep his word to you? Apparently the Virginia Tech program is changing in more ways than one, from Beamer’s character-first approach to the almighty-dollar mind-set. To the N.C.A.A., Fuente’s move is fine, because anything that enriches coaches and athletic administrators is kosher. If a big-college N.C.A.A. football player wants to be released from his written commitment to accept a better offer at another university, this can be forbidden . What about the sanctity of the contract you signed, son! Buck-Buck-Brawkkkkkk. Oklahoma leading 44-20 in the third quarter, Oklahoma State, facing fourth-and-goal on the Sooners’ 4, kicked a field goal. This is the only fact you need to guess which college won by 35 points. The Prevent Defense Should Only Be Used on the Game’s Final Down. Taking a 36-35 lead with 30 seconds remaining at Stanford, Notre Dame went into a prevent defense. That’s the only fact you need to guess which college won. Image The only thing Notre Dame "prevented" was an Irish victory. Stanford's Conrad Ukropina with the winning field goal. Credit Marcio Jose Sanchez/Associated Press Spin That Scoreboard. Texas Tech averaged 595 yards of offense and 47 points, yet was only 7-5 — contemporary scoreboard-spinning collegiate play in a nutshell. Adventures in Officiating. Coaches including Bill Belichick are upset about offensive pass interference penalties being called on pick plays — Rob Gronkowski has been flagged for offensive interference five times. A year ago, coaches were complaining about too many defensive pass interference penalties: Yours truly countered that offensive pass interference rules should be more strictly enforced because “on two-man combo patterns, many wide receivers and tight ends look like Fuzzy Thurston pulling on a Green Bay Packers 1960s power sweep.” Gronkowski looked like Thurston when flagged for O.P.I. at Denver. During the off-season, coaches were told that pulling-guard tactics by receivers would be an officiating point of emphasis in 2015. Coaches have become so accustomed to N.F.L. decision-making favoring the offense that enforcement of a long-existing rule that favors the defense now comes as a shock. The 500 Club (College Edition). Visiting William & Mary in the Division I-AA playoffs, Duquesne gained 540 yards on offense, scored 49 points, and lost. The 500 Club (Pro Edition). Visiting Seattle, the Steelers gained 528 yards on offense, and lost. The 700 Club. Dustin Smith of Zionsville, Ind., reports that in the Indiana 5A high school championship, New Palestine gained 757 yards, scored 61 points, had the lead with eight seconds remaining, and lost. The final of Snider High 64, New Palestine High 61 is all the more striking considering that in Indiana as in most states, a varsity game is 48 minutes. Extrapolated to N.F.L. length, the final was Snider 80, New Palestine 76, with 946 yards gained by the losing side. Image Snider High School's Isaac Stiebeling after scoring against New Palestine, which scored 61 points and lost in the Class 5A Indiana title game. Credit Doug Mcschooler/Associated Press Spoke Too Soon. Last week’s column decried runaway expansion of high school football playoffs — there will be 26 Texas high school state football champions by Christmas — praising only Pennsylvania, whose postseason football bracket is modest. Or, was. Reader Peter Castagna of West Chester, Pa., reports the Keystone State just added two new high school classifications , which will mean more state champions. Arena League Game of the Week. The Steelers and the Seahawks combined for 816 yards passing , 158 yards rushing. Obscure College Score. Wesley Wolverines 42, Johns Hopkins Blue Jays 37 (Division III playoffs). Located in Dover, Del., Wesley College forbids “representing another’s work or ideas as one’s own” — something nearly all presidential contenders do in the campaign books they pretend to have written. It was the seventh consecutive postseason appearance for Blue Jays football, Johns Hopkins having become to Division III what Stanford is to Division I — an elite academic college that’s also tops on the gridiron. Here’s to you , Johns Hopkins alums. Gregg Easterbrook is a contributing editor for The Atlantic. His 10th book, “The Game’s Not Over,” will be published in December by PublicAffairs Books. Follow him at @EasterbrookG .  The Upshot provides news, analysis and graphics about politics, policy and everyday life. Follow us on Facebook and Twitter . Sign up for our newsletter. Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              