   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Soccer Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Countdown to 2014 World Cup in Brazil: Day 19 By  Jack Bell May 24, 2014 Image Chile's World Cup team is preparing for a friendly against Egypt on Friday. Credit Carlos Parra/European Pressphoto Agency The 2014 World Cup begins on June 12, when Brazil plays Croatia in the opening match. Reporters and editors for The Times will count down to the start of the tournament each day with a short capsule of news and interesting tidbits. Chile has gained one player and lost another as it prepares for the World Cup. A court in Santiago, the country’s capital, said on Friday that the reserve goalkeeper Johnny Herrera would be permitted to travel with the national team despite his involvement in a case that could have sent him to prison. Herrera, 33, struck and killed a female college student while driving under the influence of alcohol in December 2009. In an agreement with the family of the woman, Herrera agreed to paya significant sum of money and donate equipment to several soccer academies. Fewer than three years later, he was again charged with driving under the influence and driving with a suspended license. Last year, Herrera was sentenced to 41 days in jail and his driver’s license was suspended for two years. In the decision on Friday, under Chilean law’s “peña remitida,” Herrera was spared jail time and is now required to check in with authorities every month. Perhaps more importantly, midfielder Matias Fernández, 28, was lost for the World Cup because of an ankle injury. Fernández, who plays for Fiorentina in Italy’s Serie A, had been included in Chile’s provisional roster. But Fiorentina said this week that he would undergo surgery on his right ankle this month. In a statement, Fiorentina said: “Matias Fernandez had a check up with professor in Amsterdam regarding his right ankle injury. The consultant found that the only solution to the painful injury is to undergo arthroscopic surgery to clean out his ankle. Any attempts to continue doing sporting activity in his current state would be limited due to pain. Hence, the player advised by Fiorentina’s medical staff, has opted to anticipate the surgery before the World Cup with his national team, in order to be available for the new season.” Chile is in Group B with Australia, defending champion Spain and the Netherlands. Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              