   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Sports Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Sports Briefing Sweden Advances to Hockey World Cup Semifinals By  The Associated Press Sept. 21, 2016 Henrik Lundqvist made 45 saves, and Sweden wrapped up the top seed in Group B by reaching overtime in a 4-3 loss to Team North America. Nathan MacKinnon scored the winner for North America, but Sweden got the point it needed to advance. Lundqvist, the Rangers’ starting goaltender, has stopped 81 of 85 shots at the World Cup. Auston Matthews, Vincent Trocheck and Johnny Gaudreau also scored for North America. Filip Forsberg, Nicklas Backstrom and Patrik Berglund scored for Sweden. North America goalie John Gibson stopped 35 of 38 shots starting in place of Matt Murray. CANADA MOVES ON, TOO Jonathan Toews had two goals and an assist and Team Canada easily beat Team Europe, 4-1, in its final preliminary round game at the World Cup of Hockey in Toronto. Canada won Group A and will face North America or Russia in the semifinals on Saturday night. BASEBALL A Grand Slam and a Promising Start Nolan Arenado hit a grand slam, German Marquez pitched five solid innings for his first major league win, and the Colorado Rockies beat visiting St. Louis, 11-1, and at least temporarily slowed the Cardinals’ playoff pursuit. Marquez (1-0), allowed one run and struck out three in his first major league start after three appearances out of the bullpen. MARINERS WIN IN 12TH Robinson Cano had a sacrifice fly in the 12th inning, and host Seattle beat Toronto, 2-1, to prevent the Blue Jays from extending their lead in the American League wild-card race. COLLEGE FOOTBALL Coach Removed From Baylor Lawsuit A federal judge removed the former Baylor football coach Art Briles and the former athletic director Ian McCaw from a lawsuit brought by woman who said they and the university had ignored her claims that she was sexually assaulted by a former player who was later convicted. Briles’ lawyers had argued that the men could not be sued as individuals in their official capacity under the federal gender discrimination law. The woman’s lawyer said both men would be sued again in federal court. Image Samuel Castillejo of Villarreal, left, and Raphaël Varane of host Real Madrid collide during a 1-1 tie. Credit Francisco Seco/Associated Press The lawsuit against Baylor will continue. PRO BASKETBALL Timberwolves Discuss Garnett Buyout The Minnesota Timberwolves were working on a buyout with the 15-time All-Star forward Kevin Garnett, according to news reports. Garnett, 40, spent 12 seasons in Minnesota before being traded to Boston, where he helped the Celtics win the 2008 N.B.A. championship. He returned to Minnesota in 2014. Garnett, has averaged 17.8 points and 10 rebounds for his career since being drafted out of high school by the Timberwolves in 1995. BUCKS’ MIDDLETON INJURED Milwaukee Bucks guard Khris Middleton will have surgery to repair a torn left hamstring, an injury that will keep the team’s best shooter out for about six months. W.N.B.A. PLAYOFFS BEGIN Angel McCoughtry scored 37 points and host Atlanta beat Seattle, 94-85, in the W.N.B.A. playoffs. The Dream will face the Chicago Sky on Sunday. Correction :  An Associated Press report in the Sports Briefing column on Thursday about a judge’s decision to remove the former Baylor football coach Art Briles and the former Baylor athletic director Ian McCaw from a lawsuit against the university misstated, in some editions, the court system in which claims against both men are to be refiled. The new lawsuits will be brought in federal court, not in state court. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page B 14 of the New York edition with the headline: Sweden Advances to Hockey World Cup Semifinals . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Related Coverage Canada Ousts United States at the World Cup of Hockey Sept. 21, 2016 Image Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              