   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Sports Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Sports Briefing Andorra Ends 11 Years of Losses, With a Tie March 25, 2017 Rarely has a scoreless stalemate tasted so sweet. But 11 years of nothing but losing will do that to a team. Andorra’s 0-0 tie with the visiting Faroe Islands in a World Cup qualifier ended its run of 58 competitive defeats. It was the first point in qualifying for Andorra, a Pyrenees mountain principality with a population of 80,000, since a scoreless draw with Finland in 2005. “We are happy because we know who we are and how hard this has been,” the team captain Ildefons Lima said. Faroe Islands finished with 10 players after Joan Edmundsson drew a second yellow card with 15 minutes left. WORLD CUP QUALIFYING Matthijs de Ligt, 17, became the youngest Netherlands player to make his international debut since 1931, but he handed host Bulgaria an early goal in a 2-0 loss. Cristiano Ronaldo moved to fourth on Europe’s career scoring list with two goals in Portugal’s 3-0 win over visiting Hungary. Switzerland won its fifth straight game, 1-0 over Latvia, and remained atop Europe’s Group B. Olivier Giroud scored twice as France, which leads Europe’s Group A, beat host Luxembourg, 3-1. Belgium’s Romelu Lukaku scored with two minutes remaining to salvage a 1-1 tie with visiting Greece. RED BULLS 0, REAL SALT LAKE 0 In his first M.L.S. start, Matt Van Oekel posted a shutout for Real Salt Lake (0-2-2). Luis Robles had four saves for the host Red Bulls (2-2-1), who were missing Sacha Kljestan, Derrick Etienne Jr. and Michael Murillo because of World Cup qualifying. COLLEGE BASKETBALL Indiana Hires Coach From Dayton Indiana named Archie Miller its new coach after he led Dayton to a 139-63 record in six seasons. The Flyers won the past two Atlantic 10 regular-season titles and made N.C.A.A. tournament appearances the past four seasons. PRO BASKETBALL Knicks Lose With Anthony Sidelined Derrick Rose and Willy Hernangomez each scored 24 points as the Knicks lost to the Spurs, 106-98, in San Antonio. Kawhi Leonard scored a game-high 29 points for the Spurs, who built an 18-point halftime lead. Carmelo Anthony missed his second straight game with a sore left knee. HORSE RACING Arrogate Rallies to Become Highest Earner Arrogate showed his class in the Dubai World Cup in the United Arab Emirates as he came from last place after a delay out of the stalls to win by two and a quarter lengths. The 4-year-old Arrogate became the highest-earning racehorse, surpassing California Chrome, winner of the Dubai cup last year. Arrogate has grossed $17,084,600, winning seven of his eight career races. AUTO RACING Hamilton Wins Pole Position in Australia Lewis Hamilton took the pole position with the fastest lap ever at Albert Park in Melbourne and will start the season-opening Australian Grand Prix at the front of the grid. The times kept improving during the three practice sessions, and Hamilton, who drives for Mercedes, had a last lap in qualifying of 1 minute 22.188 seconds. That lowered the mark Sebastian Vettel had set in his Ferrari, which was already lower than the previous quickest time in Melbourne, which Vettel set in 2011. TRACK AND FIELD Indoor Marathon Records Fall in New York Two world records in the indoor marathon were set on a 200-meter track at the Armory in Upper Manhattan. Christopher Zablocki of the United States broke the men’s record by running 211 laps in 2 hours 21 minutes 48 seconds. Laura Manninen of Finland finished in 2:42:30 to set the women’s record. Kate Pallardy lowered the American women’s record to 2:44:11. (NYT) HOCKEY Devils Miss Playoffs for Fifth Straight Year Sebastian Aho scored twice and the surging Carolina Hurricanes stretched their point streak to 10 games with a 3-1 victory that eliminated the host Devils from playoff contention for the fifth straight year since they made the 2012 Stanley Cup final. CYCLING Froome Fades at Tour of Catalonia Chris Froome fell out of contention for the Tour of Catalonia in Reus, Spain, after ceding more than 25 minutes to the leader, Alejandro Valverde, during the sixth stage. Daryl Impey edged Valverde in a sprint finish to win the 117-mile ride in four and a half hours. Valverde, who took the lead after winning Friday’s stage, increased his lead to 53 seconds over his nearest chaser, Alberto Contador. TENNIS Federer Starts Strong at Miami Open Roger Federer returned to the Miami Open after a two-year absence and beat the 19-year-old American qualifier Frances Tiafoe, 7-6 (2), 6-3, in Key Biscayne, Fla. Federer, who won Key Biscayne in 2005 and 2006, is 14-1 in 2017. GOLF Spaniard Waltzes Into Texas Semifinals Jon Rahm, a 22-year-old rookie from Spain, easily advanced to the semifinals of the World Golf Championships match play event in Austin, Tex. Rahm played only 27 holes in his two matches, beating Charles Howell III, 6 and 4, and Soren Kjeldsen, 7 and 5. He next plays Bill Haas, who eliminated Phil Mickelson in the quarterfinals, 2 and 1. Dustin Johnson, the world’s No. 1 player, was in an all-square match for the first time in the event before beating Alex Noren, 3 and 2. Johnson will face Hideto Tanihara. NEARING A FIRST WIN Chris Stroud, who is seeking his first PGA Tour victory in his 277th career start, shot a five-under-par 67 at the Puerto Rico Open in Rio Grande. He holds a one-shot lead over Bill Lunde and D. A. Points. L.P.G.A.’S KIA CLASSIC Mirim Lee shot a five-under 67 in the third round of the Kia Classic in Carlsbad, Calif., to go to 13-under and take a one-shot lead over Mi Jung Hur, who made a 67-foot putt on No. 18 to record a 66. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page SP 6 of the New York edition with the headline: Soccer; Andorra Ends 11 Years of Losses, With a Tie . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              