   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Movies Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by A Dog’s Purpose? To Speak on Film, So to Speak Image Bryce Gheisar in “A Dog’s Purpose.” Credit Joe Lederer/Universal Pictures By  Finn Cohen Jan. 27, 2017 In a recent T-Mobile ad , a dog is trying to watch a slow-motion video on its cellphone of a soaking wet dog shaking itself. Apparently, the phone-owning dog has exceeded its monthly data limit, preventing the full video from playing. This causes understandable outrage, and a breaking of the fourth wall: The dog turns to us to complain — but, wait! That dog is actually speaking to another dog watching videos on a cellphone and commiserating about the limits of inferior telecommunication plans. An onscreen talking dog is not new — remember the Taco Bell Chihuahua ? But I recently discovered an alarmingly expansive history of talking dogs as cinematic stars. Purely by accident, I stumbled across “Bark Ranger,” a seemingly straight-to-streaming 2015 film featuring Jon Lovitz as the voice of the title dog. On paper, this seemed like inadvertent comedy gold. The standard plot — young boy and heroic, smarmy dog confront bad guys — was perfect fodder for children. But if you don’t have kids, spending even five minutes in this world will wreak havoc on your Amazon Prime recommendations. Bark Ranger Official Trailer 1 (2015) - John Lovitz Movie HD Credit Video by Movieclips Film Festivals & Indie Films And most of those recommendations are deceptive — as in “Bark Ranger,” there’s way too much plot and not enough talking dogs. The genre’s best offerings are limited, but robust, depending on your standards. THE ‘AIR BUD’ EMPIRE spans 14 films (beginning in 1997). The first five are concerned with a golden retriever’s foray into professional athletics, not conversational English, but the sequels see the dog’s offspring using their words to eventually explore space. (Space seems to be the gold standard for B-movie sequels; see “Leprechaun 4: In Space” or “Dracula 3000.” ) And nothing says “we can squeeze seven films out of this premise” like puppies wearing gold chains, calling one another “dawg” and saying “for shizzle.” THE ‘BEVERLY HILLS CHIHUAHUA’ FRANCHISE may have fully legitimized the practice by using Hollywood actors like Drew Barrymore, Edward James Olmos and Andy Garcia as canine voices in the first film, from 2008. The sequel, with less star power, touches on standard human concerns of middle age, like marriage, family and mortgages. By the third one, the premise may have exhausted the studio’s budget and the intended audience’s patience. (The original still has the luster of a cult classic, evidenced by a passionate IMDB thread about the film’s appeal to childless adults.) THE NEW FILM ‘A DOG’S PURPOSE,’ based on the 2010 novel by W. Bruce Cameron (and directed by Lasse Hallstrom of “My Life as a Dog” and “Hachi: A Dog’s Tale”), has a dog asking us the big existential question: “What is the meaning of life?” The plot follows the spirit of a dog that passes into a new dog each time it dies, helping lonely humans find meaning. (People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals has called for a boycott of the film after footage was released showing one of the dogs seemingly forced into rushing water.) And the film has stars — Dennis Quaid, Peggy Lipton and John Ortiz play humans whose lives are changed by canine reincarnation, while Josh Gad provides the dog voice. But unlike the instant gratification of “Beverly Hills Chihuahua” or “Air Buddies,” in which dogs talk among themselves and with other animals, the canine narrators in “A Dog’s Purpose” and “Bark Ranger” mostly address the viewer; human characters can’t hear them. There’s even a new ABC series called “Downward Dog,” brought to you by the same people who created that Taco Bell Chihuahua, in which a dog narrates its owner’s life, but only to us. It’s as if the magical realism that gives the power of speech to dogs draws the line at letting people understand them. This seems like an oversight. Is there an unwritten industry rule that says different species cannot communicate onscreen? What would be the harm in allowing a Republican corgi to argue about entitlements or climate change with its Democratic owner? After all, dogs are a global occurrence. In 2014, San Francisco made a dog its mayor for a day — that seems like a concept really worth a 90-minute narrative. Perhaps our hunter-gatherer ancestors, without yet having developed the concept of irony, wondered what was on their dogs’ minds. Could these beasts understand the primitive conversations around the fire? Why was barking their only form of communication? The questions modern humans have now about dogs may be along the same lines, just updated for our times. Do we secretly yearn for beings that eat things out of the trash and drool when excited to be preoccupied with geopolitics, insurance rates or 4G data plans? Do they appreciate our efforts to scoop their digestive output? The transformation of cats into internet traffic juggernauts is based on material that largely allows them to be themselves: aloof, illogical, unimpressed. It’s arguable that cats don’t really give us a thought beyond the next meal or as the being with opposable thumbs who can open the door. This makes them the straight man in our ongoing human comedy. But dogs need us, and it seems like this keeps playing out in our cultural output as an imagined emotional reciprocity. An insistence that they share our values, our sense of humor, our embrace of capitalism. Some ancient cultures deified dogs. Some contemporary cultures eat them. We make them talk. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page AR 12 of the New York edition with the headline: Sometimes a Woof Isn’t Just a Woof . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Related Coverage Review: ‘A Dog’s Purpose,’ With Many Lives and Many Clichés Jan. 25, 2017 Image Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              