   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index College Football Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Clemson’s Remade Defense Passes Its Opening Test Image Deshaun Watson of Clemson passing during the second half against Auburn on Saturday. Watson and the Tigers’ stellar offense received a boost from an untested defense during the game. Credit Kevin C. Cox/Getty Images By  The Associated Press Sept. 8, 2016 CLEMSON, S.C. — Clemson’s young defenders have been better than expected, at least after one game. The defense was among Clemson’s major question marks entering the season, but it showed in a win over Auburn that it might just turn out to be a worthy successor to the some recent highly praised Tigers defenses. No. 2 Clemson (1-0) held Auburn to 262 yards on Saturday, just 87 of them on the ground, with new players like Clelin Ferrell, Dexter Lawrence and Kendall Joseph in the lineup. “As a group, we were definitely nervous,” said Ferrell, who made three tackles in his debut as a starting defensive end. “Hey, we’ve been working for this moment, and now it’s finally here. So it was like, it’s time to put on a show.” Clemson, which fell to Alabama, 45-40, in last season’s national championship game, will try to keep the show going at home Saturday against Troy (1-0). Lawrence, of Wake Forest, N.C., was the country’s No. 2 high school prospect last year. He had a sack among his seven tackles in his first college game. Middle linebacker Joseph, who took over for last year’s leading tackler B. J. Goodson, led Clemson with 10 stops, including three behind the line of scrimmage, at Auburn. The defense is a work in progress after having lost eight starters, including five players who were drafted into the N.F.L. after leaving college early. Then again, with an offense led by quarterback Deshaun Watson, a leading Heisman Trophy candidate, and featuring an assortment of talented skill players, there was a sense that Clemson did not need much defense anyway. Against Auburn, it was the new-look, fresh-faced defense that saved the Tigers. Another new starter, safety Jadar Johnson, knocked down two Hail Mary passes into the end zone to preserve the 19-13 win. “We’re really just doing our job, holding down our side of the ball,” Joseph said. “Supporting our offense and getting a win.” Lawrence — at 6 feet 5 inches and 340 pounds — is the biggest new piece of the puzzle and picked up Clemson’s first sack of the season soon after entering the game. “I knew I was a big strong guy and I could move,” he said. “I felt like I could make an impact for the team.” Ferrell said the players all understood the shoes they had to fill. Three of Clemson’s last four starting defensive ends — Vic Beasley, Shaq Lawson and Kevin Dodd — are in the N.F.L. The Tigers were No. 1 in the country in 2014 in fewest yards allowed and were 10th over all in last season’s run to the national championship game. Lawson and Dodd were 1-2 nationally in tackles for a loss. “Coming into the season, even before camp started, we had a really big chip on our shoulders,” Ferrell said. “We know, yeah, we lost a lot of guys. But it’s college football, so it’s next man up.” Brent Venables, Clemson’s defensive coordinator, acknowledged that he had been hard on the group in camp, prepping them as fast as he could to speed development. And he was happy with the results in the first game. “I’m just really pleased with the effort and the overall execution,” Venables said. “For a lot of guys, that was their first start. They really played disciplined, and that’s just not normal.” Ferrell is a rangy, 6-5, 255-pounder in the mold of past Clemson standouts at the position like Gaines Adams and Dodd. He redshirted last season, saying it had been difficult at times to be on the sidelines during one of Clemson’s most successful seasons. Ferrell said the showing at Auburn was a strong, early statement that there would be no defensive drop-off at Clemson. “We want to be known as those guys who are not afraid of our chances and make the best of our opportunity,” Ferrell said. “We want to be known as a great defense this upcoming year.” A version of this article appears in print on , on Page B 13 of the New York edition with the headline: Remade Clemson Defense Passes Its Opening Test . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Related Coverage Houston Goes All Out to Gain Entry to Big 12 Sept. 8, 2016 Image Top-Ranked Alabama Begins Its Title Defense by Routing No. 20 Southern California Sept. 4, 2016 Image Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              