   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Movies Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Michael B. Jordan Gives Millennials Their ‘Rocky’ With ‘Creed’ Image Michael B. Jordan photographed at the Los Angeles Athletic Club. Credit Elizabeth Weinberg for The New York Times By  Cara Buckley Oct. 28, 2015 MIAMI BEACH — There came a time not long ago when the actor Michael B. Jordan realized he had to stop dying on screen, because it was killing his mom. In his breakout role as a teenage drug dealer in “The Wire,” Mr. Jordan’s character was shot; in the movie “Blackout,” he was stabbed; in “Chronicle,” struck by lightning; and in the HBO film “Red Tails,” about the Tuskegee Airmen, gunned down in a warplane. This was followed by his star turn in “Fruitvale Station,” the 2013 picture that recreated the last day of Oscar Grant III, an unarmed young black man shot to death by a white transit police officer on an Oakland, Calif., train platform early one New Year’s Day. The fact that Mr. Jordan’s mother, Donna, a high school guidance counselor and artist, knew in advance about the fates of each character did nothing to allay her grief. Whether sitting alongside her son at premieres or watching him go through death throes on TV at home, she would end up in tears. “Oh she knows it’s coming, it doesn’t matter, it’s uncontrollable sobs,” Mr. Jordan, who is 28, said during a recent interview at the Soho Beach House here. “And it just weighed on me after a while. I’m like: ‘Guys, I’m not dying anymore. I can’t do it.’ ” With his latest film, “Creed,” Mr. Jordan not only made good on his vow, but he also helped bring back a franchise. He plays an aspiring fighter named Adonis Johnson, the heretofore unknown son of the boxer Apollo Creed. Adonis journeys to Philadelphia to be trained by Rocky Balboa, played by — who else? — Sylvester Stallone. The film again paired Mr. Jordan with Ryan Coogler, the director of “Fruitvale Station,” who in turn conceived of “Creed” as a deeply personal homage to his sickly father. Co-starring Tessa Thompson, of “Dear White People” and “Selma,” as Mr. Jordan’s love interest, “Creed” explores a different side of Philadelphia than the Rocky films do. While the story largely centers on the father-and-son-like bond between Adonis and an ailing Rocky, it is told through the eyes of young black millennials, showcasing the city’s hip-hop and dirt bike scenes. Opening Nov. 25, the film and its attendant promotional duties come at a good time for Mr. Jordan. He is still smarting from the crash and burn this past summer of “ Fantastic Four ,” in which he played his first superhero, Human Torch. “It was tough, because it was the first time I ever went through that,” Mr. Jordan said of that film’s critical and box-office drubbing, “Some things are out of your control, even if you show up and give everything you’ve got, even if you give 110 percent.” Mr. Jordan, who was born in California and raised in New Jersey, was in Miami Beach to promote “Creed” at the Revolt Music Conference, a three-day event that has been described as a “ hip-hop Comic-Con ” and is affiliated with Sean Combs’s television channel. Mr. Jordan had the casual-slash-expensive look nailed, wearing a black T-shirt that hugged his chiseled biceps, jeans, and pristine black and gray Nike high tops, with diamond studs in his ears. Easygoing, handsome and beguilingly boyish, with doe-like eyes, he unsurprisingly has countless, often possessive female fans. Later that day, after he posted a picture of himself and Ms. Thompson in what looked like an intimate chat to his Instagram account , where he has more than 700,000 followers, scores of dismayed comments flooded in. “She gotta back up,” “Who is this chick with my man???” and “Noooooo.” (The two are just friends.) From the outside, the prospect of playing the son of an icon, albeit a fictional one, in yet another “Rocky” movie might seem daunting, but Mr. Jordan said the stakes felt higher with “Fruitvale,” because he was playing a real man in a tale riven with tragic relevance. (The film arrived with eerie timeliness — it opened the day before a Florida man, George Zimmerman, was acquitted in the shooting death of an unarmed black teenager, Trayvon Martin.) “Being a person of color, a black man, in America, it was a very personal story,” he said of his critically acclaimed portrayal of Grant. “I believe nobody has seen or heard of Adonis before. I felt I could step into it clean and not have any real pressure or expectations.” And having Mr. Coogler as co-writer and director imbued him, he said, with confidence and ease. “He’s my guy,” Mr. Jordan said. “We have a communication and certain understanding of each other. We just click.” Image Michael B. Jordan, center, as Adonis Johnson and Sylvester Stallone, right, as Rocky Balboa in “Creed.” Credit Warner Bros. Pictures Reviving a seminal and lucrative franchise is still a high-profile risk. On average, each of the six Rocky films made $80 million, or, in today’s dollars $222 million apiece, according to Box Office Mojo. Mr. Coogler said Mr. Stallone — who declined to be interviewed for this article — was initially apprehensive about the film, and took no small amount of persuading, mulling it over for about a year before saying yes. Mr. Stallone’s biggest qualm, Mr. Coogler said, was his belief that the Rocky series had ended well. “It is true that the Rocky story had come to a nice conclusion as far as Rocky being a driving force,” Mr. Coogler said, referring to the last film, “Rocky Balboa,” from 2006. “But this film was about another character, with Rocky in a supporting role. That made sense. That was something he could get behind.” Mr. Coogler grew up with Rocky Balboa. As a teenager, his father Ira, who adored the “Rocky” films, had watched the movies with his own mother — Mr. Coogler’s grandmother — as she lay dying of cancer. Later, when Mr. Coogler had big football games coming up, his father would play the films to get his son pumped. Then, as Mr. Coogler was finishing up film school in 2011, Ira grew very ill with a mysterious neuromuscular condition (he eventually got better). “I was dealing with seeing him become weak, and our relationship changed as a result of it,” Mr. Coogler said. “I had to kind of deal with his mortality. That’s when I came up with the idea of ‘Creed.’ ” He mentioned the idea to Mr. Jordan, a lifelong, intrinsically competitive athlete — he took karate as a kid, ran track, and played soccer and basketball as a teenager, and also portrayed a football player in the television series “Friday Night Lights” — shortly after casting him in “Fruitvale.” Mr. Coogler explained: “I knew he was the guy. In addition to the emotional dexterity he would have to have, I know he had the physical element to pull it off.” He spent nearly a year preparing — training, lifting weights, learning how to box and working out two to three times a day, six days a week. His diet was similarly, and joylessly, strict, consisting of boiled meat, fish, green vegetables, rice and the odd piece of fruit. “I gave up everything that was good in the world,” Mr. Jordan said, “and ate everything that was bland.” On his cheat days, which he allowed himself once a week, he got up extra early so that he’d have more time to eat, wolfing down French toast, Philly cheesesteaks, pizza, pasta and doughnuts, a habit he soon pared back after spending too many days afterward in severe gastrointestinal distress. Image Mr. Jordan, left, with Kevin Durand in "Fruitvale Station." Credit Ron Koeberer/Weinstein Company During production, he fought real fighters and had no body double. “That was him taking real punches,” Mr. Coogler said. “That was all Mike.” Mr. Jordan was routinely bloodied, bruised and dizzy — “pain,” he said, “was definitely involved” — and endured ice baths and a Chinese therapy called Gua sha. (Google image it if you dare.) Beyond the physical duress, he also had to meet the emotional demands of his role: falling in love, channeling anger and wrestling childhood demons. “He’s the kind of actor who will do anything to find the truest part of a scene,” Ms. Thompson said. “He’s always open to learning and retaining information, and has a humility kind of like a child. That for me makes him very special as an actor.” For all of Mr. Jordan’s immersion in “Creed,” “Fruitvale” seems to be the film still guiding his career choices, not least because of its continuing relevance, presaging the Black Lives Matter movement and the high-profile deaths of unarmed black people at the hands of the police. “There have been so many more; it’s been happening for such a long time,” Mr. Jordan said. “I’m a young black man in America, so it’s my life, it’s always been my life, it always will be life.” And so, in his next project he is set to play Bryan Stevenson , the real-life lawyer who defends indigent people and minorities, and after that, an Atlanta schoolteacher caught up in the city’s test cheating scandal in “Wrong Answer,” again with Mr. Coogler. “I’m just trying to shine lights on little situations that I feel are the problem, and telling it through art,” Mr. Jordan said. “I think that’s my part. To have people receive something that inspires thought, and conversation, and maybe you can change the way someone thinks. I think that’s where it starts. “If you can change the way you think, the way you receive somebody, and not be intimidated by the way they look, or the color of their skin, or what they have on, it’s a step.” A version of this article appears in print on , on Page AR 22 of the New York edition with the headline: Millennials Get Their ‘Rocky’ . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              