   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Fashion & Style Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by At Totokaelo’s New Home, the Fitting Rooms Are Bank Vaults Image Totokaelo now resides at 190 Bowery, a landmark building that was once Germania Bank; its Credit Winnie Au for The New York Times By  Valeriya Safronova Oct. 3, 2017 Recognizable to most New Yorkers as “that graffiti-covered building on the corner of Spring,” 190 Bowery has maintained a mysterious facade since the photographer Jay Maisel bought it in 1966 for $102,000 and converted the former Germania Bank into a six-story, 72-room home and studio for himself, his wife and their daughter. Image The converted lobby has a wood floor, the remnants of a basketball court installed by Jay Maisel, one of the building’s earlier occupants. Credit Winnie Au for The New York Times Several years ago Mr. Maisel sold the building to the developer Aby Rosen for $55 million. Since then, Great Bowery, a creative agency, has taken over five floors, but the lobby and basement have remained empty, until now. The street-facing walls have been scrubbed of some of the spray-painted designs that covered them, and plants line the exterior steps. On Friday, Totokaelo, the cool-kid shop in Seattle that opened a New York outpost on Crosby Street in 2015 , begins an 11-month residency in the landmark structure . Image Next to the stairs leading to the basement is a long cage with a swinging door, its original purpose a mystery. Credit Winnie Au for The New York Times The first floor is high-ceilinged and airy. Echoes of the bank lobby that occupied it more than a century ago are still there: The walls are a marble the color of desert dust, and uneven mosaic tiles line the floor. Polished wood panels cover the rest of the floor, remnants of a basketball court that Mr. Maisel installed. Katie Burnett, a stylist who has worked with Totokaelo on the company’s ad campaigns, created the mannequin displays, including a mountainous pile of Vetements tops. “It’s definitely more of an editorial approach,” said Kate Schley, the creative visual manager of Totokaelo. “You don’t get this as much in brick and mortar.” Image A set of four doors leads into a vault where shoes are displayed. Credit Winnie Au for The New York Times Front and center, Calvin Klein’s shiny red hangers sway under the weight of Raf Simons’s latest: chunky lime and Meyer-lemon sweaters, and long colorful pants. Vetements, Acne and Jacquemus are on the same floor, their designs arranged amid plants and free-standing radiators. Head to the basement and you will pass an elongated cage with a square-shaped swinging door. Its purpose is a mystery. The downstairs is darker, more stark — a cross between a dungeon and an asylum out of a B-horror flick. “Down here you’ll find things a bit more raw and broken,” Ms. Schley said. Image A jewelry case occupies a room that was once used by bank customers to try on the prized possessions they stored in the vault. Credit Winnie Au for The New York Times Bits of tile are missing from the floor and walls, holes have been left unpatched, and the fluorescent lights and reflective ceiling material that Mr. Maisel used for his photography remain. A large bank vault with a four-door layer of protection and a cage around it dominates the space. Inside, shoes are displayed on metal shelves that attach magnetically to the walls. A room by the vault was once used by customers taking necklaces and brooches out of their safe deposit boxes to try on before heading to the theater. It now contains a jewelry case. The fitting rooms downstairs are separated from the main floor with strips of clear plastic. Upstairs, they are former vaults, their heavy iron doors still in place. Not to worry, claustrophobes: “These will stay 100 percent open,” Ms. Schley said. “Getting undressed in a vault is perhaps uncomfortable. So we added a soft carpet, a soft curtain, lighting.” Image One side of the vault is blocked off with a large cage where Totokaelo has put in a light installation. Credit Winnie Au for The New York Times Maison Margiela and Dries Van Noten hold court in two other sections of the basement. Dries Van Noten is in a corner illuminated by a red light, a reference to the Paris tunnel where the designer showed his collection last February. Maison Margiela’s nook reflects the label’s embrace of white; it is brightly lit and accessorized with furniture covered by white drape cloths. “No other brand can fit into that space as well as Margiela does,” said Chris Green, the divisional merchandise manager for Totokaelo. Others have more flexibility in shifting between the floors. “You can take a brand like Jacquemus and bring it downstairs because of the color palette, the very harsh whites and blacks together,” he said. “Upstairs it feels light, airy and fresh. You can bring Vetements down here and it would fit right in and be very street, dark, ’90s, techno.” Despite the many nods to the history of 190 Bowery, one retail decision was made with the future in mind. “This will be the first time men’s and women’s will be together,” Mr. Green said. “Our female client is not scared to buy men’s wear, our men’s wear client is not scared to buy women’s wear. As we progress, that line of this is a men’s or women’s item is fading.”  Continue following our fashion and lifestyle coverage on Facebook ( Styles and Modern Love ), Twitter ( Styles , Fashion and Weddings ) and Instagram . A version of this article appears in print on , on Page D 4 of the New York edition with the headline: Totokaelo Embraces the Layered History of Its New Home . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              