   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Arts Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Spare Times for Children for June 13-19 Image A car from the BRT Brooklyn Union Elevated Railroad from 1907. Credit Black Paw By  Laurel Graeber June 12, 2014 ‘BIGGEST SUBWAY BIRTHDAY BASH EVER!’ The New York City transit system will take you to many destinations, but one place it won’t go is back in time. It will come close, however, on Saturday, when families can enjoy a train ride that hasn’t been available since 1946. It’s just one way of saying, “Happy Birthday, Subway.” “We’ve done birthday parties before,” said Gabrielle Shubert, the New York Transit Museum ’s director. “This one is special because it’s the first time we’ve actually run trains within the museum.” That’s not as difficult as it sounds. Saturday’s “Biggest Subway Birthday Bash Ever!,” which will celebrate the 110th anniversary of the Interborough Rapid Transit and raise funds for museum education programs, will briefly revive the HH shuttle, a train that from 1936 to 1946 traveled between the old Court Street station and the Hoyt-Schermerhorn station in Brooklyn Heights. The decommissioned Court Street station is now the site of the Transit Museum, which will run vintage cars back and forth along the old route every 10 minutes. The cars themselves will be 1930s models that originally served the A, C and E lines. “Car 100 was the very first A car to come off the assembly line,” Ms. Shubert said, “and it will be one of the cars we’re running.” They won’t be the only ones children can explore. On a Lo-V (low-voltage) car, the museum’s oldest from the IRT, a costumed actress will portray one of the first female conductors, discussing her work in 1917. Other examples from the museum’s collection — which ranges from turn-of-the-20th-century elevated cars (the subway’s predecessor) to 1960s models — will also be open. A photographer on a car from the BRT Brooklyn Union Elevated Railroad will take family portraits with old-style hats and children’s Metropolitan Transportation Authority costumes. Young passengers can also take home a memento of the subway’s colorful past in the form of “Miles of Tiles,” a craft project in which they’ll build station-inspired mosaics. The museum will serve cake, and Lloyd H. Miller , leader of the history-themed children’s band the Deedle Deedle Dees, will lead singalongs. “I’m sure he’s got a lot of train songs up his sleeve,” Ms. Shubert said. One tune that’s guaranteed: “Happy Birthday.” (From 9 to 11 a.m., Boerum Place and Schermerhorn Street, Brooklyn Heights, 718-694-4952, web.mta.info/mta/museum; $55; $30 for children; $150 for a family four-pack; free for under 2. V.I.P. packages, $250 for six tickets, and $500 for eight tickets, include a goody bag.) ‘Archaeology Zone: Discovering Treasures From Playgrounds to Palaces’ (Friday, Sunday through Tuesday, and Thursday) Children will step into the shoes of an explorer like Indiana Jones in this permanent exhibition at the Jewish Museum, but the adventures will be purely scholarly. Still, there is plenty of excitement in analyzing artifacts like a jar handle, a clay jug and a bangle and figuring out the purpose behind ancient pieces like a Greek helmet and a bull-shaped vessel. This interactive show, for ages 3 to 10, also includes a recreated room from the Ottoman period (about 1900), where young archaeologists can dress in costume. From 11 a.m. to 5:45 p.m.; until 8 p.m. on Thursdays. 1109 Fifth Avenue, at 92nd Street, 212-423-3200, thejewishmuseum.org. Free with admission: $15; $12 for 65+; $7.50 for students; free for under 18 and members; pay what you wish on Thursdays from 5 to 8 p.m. ‘The Ballad of Pondlife McGurk’ (Friday through Sunday) One actor — Andy Manley — incarnates every character from the class bully to the most popular girl in this new play from Catherine Wheels Theater Company in Scotland. Having its American premiere at the New Victory Theater, the drama, recommended for children 8 and older, focuses on Martin, the new boy at school who finds happiness in his friendship with the soft-spoken and slightly odd Simon McGurk. But events test their bond. (Through June 22.) Fridays at 7 p.m.; Saturdays at 2 and 7 p.m.; Sundays at noon and 5 p.m., 209 West 42nd Street, Manhattan, 646-223-3010, newvictory.org; $25; $18 for members. ‘Bessie’s Big Shot’ (Friday and Saturday, and Tuesday through Thursday) If a cow can jump over the moon, why can’t she fly on a trapeze? In this production at the Swedish Cottage Marionette Theater, the title character, a cow, longs to join the circus. Based on a show that used to tour on the City Parks Foundation PuppetMobile, this theatrical adventure, by Douglas Strich, Alexander Bartenieff and Bruce Cannon, follows Bessie as she follows her dreams. (Through June 29.) Weekdays, except Mondays, at 10:30 a.m. and noon; Saturdays and Sundays at 1 p.m. At 79th Street and the West Drive, Central Park, 212-988-9093, cityparksfoundation.org. Performances are $10; $7 for under 12. Reservations required. (Some shows are sold out.) Bronx River Festival (Saturday) Whatever your preferred means of locomotion — boat, bike or just plain feet — this annual celebration will offer plenty of opportunities to use it to explore the Bronx River and its surroundings. Sponsored by the Bronx River Alliance, the festival will offer canoeing, bicycle loans, field games, nature walks, a historical tour, zumba and capoeira, and educational activities including water testing and eel monitoring. From 11 a.m. to 4 p.m., Shoelace Park, 219th Street and Bronx Boulevard, Williamsbridge, 718-430-4665, bronxriver.org/calendar; free. ‘Brooklyn Block Lab’ (Friday through Sunday, and Tuesday through Thursday) You can learn a lot from Brooklyn blocks, and that doesn’t mean just the borough’s streets. The Brooklyn Children’s Museum has opened its “Brooklyn Block Lab,” a new exhibition offering visitors a chance to build and explore with four different kinds of blocks: wooden units; Imagination Playground’s foam blocks; Kapla Planks, a Dutch flat wooden variety; and Magna-Tiles, which are equipped with magnets. And the museum is serious about the space as a lab: Educators will document how the interactions among children there help facilitate language development. (Through Aug. 31) The lab is open daily, except Monday, from 11 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. At 145 Brooklyn Avenue, at St. Marks Avenue, Crown Heights, 718-735-4400, brooklynkids.org. Free with museum admission: $9; free for members and under 1; free to all on Thursdays from 3 to 5 p.m., and every third Thursday from 3 to 7 p.m. Children’s Museum of the Arts Free Art Island Outpost (Saturday and Sunday) This island fun doesn’t require a flight to distant shores. The Children’s Museum of the Arts is offering another summer of weekend workshops on Governors Island, exploring a variety of crafts and materials. The theme this season is “Dreamscapes,” with projects in visual arts, theater games and filmmaking, all devoted to fantasy and adventure. From 11 a.m. to 3 p.m., outside Buildings 11 and 14; Nolan Park, Governors Island, 212-274-0986, cmany.org/summer; free. Family Astronomy (Saturday) Summer is a fantastic time for stargazing, but do you know what you’re looking at? This program at the Hayden Planetarium goes beyond familiar constellations like the Big Dipper to point out other formations in the summer sky, such as Favdna’s Bow and Arrow. It will also compare our means of identifying patterns in the stars with those of other cultures and civilizations. At 6:30 p.m., Space Theater, American Museum of Natural History, Central Park West and 81st Street, 212-769-5200, amnh.org; $12; $10 for members. Film Forum Jr.: ‘To Kill a Mockingbird’ (Sunday) Children can celebrate Father’s Day with one of the great parental figures of page and screen: Atticus Finch, the upstanding lawyer who defends a young black man who’s been wrongly accused in Harper Lee’s novel “To Kill a Mockingbird.” This Oscar-winning film adaptation from 1962 stars Gregory Peck in the role; Mary Badham plays his daughter, Scout, and Phillip Alford is his son, Jem. The screening is part of Film Forum Jr., a series introducing classic cinema to children. (Series runs through June 29.) At 11 a.m., Film Forum, 209 West Houston Street, west of Avenue of the Americas, South Village, 212-727-8110, filmforum.org; $7.50. ‘The Gazillion Bubble Show: The Next Generation’ (Friday through Sunday, and Wednesday) Children love bubbles, and this interactive show promises not just a gazillion but also some of the largest ever blown, along with light effects and lasers. The stars are the members of the Yang family: Fan and Ana Yang and their son Deni and others, who rotate as M.C.’s for the production. Audience members may even find themselves in bubbles of their own. (The run is open-ended.) Friday at 7 p.m.; Saturday at 11 a.m. and 2 and 4:30 p.m.; Sunday at noon and 3 p.m.; Wednesday at 11 a.m. and 2 p.m.; New World Stages, 340 West 50th Street, Clinton, 212-239-6200, gazillionbubbleshow.com; $55 to $75; lap seats for ages 2 and under are $20, cash only, at the box office. ‘The Greatest Pirate Story (N)ever Told!’ (Saturday) How do you describe a show whose script changes with every performance? A few reliable statements: Smooching, sword fighting and water spraying will occur. “Aaarr!” will be heard often. And, most important, it will provide more laughs than there are bones in Davy Jones’s locker. So it goes in this hour long family musical, created by Christopher Leidenfrost, in which a pirate crew is cursed by a sea witch and has to perform a Broadway-style spectacle to get its treasure. Young audience members help write the scenes, in the style of the game Mad Libs. (The run is open-ended.) Saturdays at 11 a.m., Snapple Theater Center, 210 West 50th Street, Manhattan, 212-921-7862, greatestpiratestory.com; $39 to $99. (The $39 tickets are available only by calling or visiting the box office.) ‘The Greek Monsters’ (Friday through Thursday) Construction crews aren’t all that have invaded the Onassis Cultural Center NY during its renovation; a host of mythological monsters has moved in, too. The center asked Beetroot, a Grecian design group, to install this exhibition of sculptures, bas-reliefs and paintings in the Olympic Tower atrium while work was going on. Children can meet characters like the Cyclops, Medusa, the Minotaur and Cerberus (the three-headed dog that guarded the underworld) and play a wall game using magnetic puzzle pieces. The weekends also feature Sundays at Onassis, a free program from 10:30 to 11:30 a.m. in which visitors ages 3 through 7 will explore the show, learn about the mythology, try out some monster movement and make a related art project to take home. (Through July 31.) Daily from 10 a.m. to 8 p.m., 645 Fifth Avenue, at 51st Street, onassisusa.org; free, but reservations are required for the Sunday program via email to guidedtoursOCC@onassisusa.org, with the subject line stating “Sundays at Onassis.” ‘How to Train Your Dragon 2’ Special Screening Event (Saturday) Hiccup and his fire-breathing friend, Toothless, are back in theaters now in this sequel to the 2010 hit “How to Train Your Dragon.” But only this screening at Lincoln Center will feature a presentation by James Baxter and Sean Sexton, supervisors for DreamWorks Animation. They will also answer questions after the film, which will be shown in 3-D and follows the adventures of the young Viking hero and his fellows five years after the time of the first movie. At 3 p.m., Walter Reade Theater, 165 West 65th Street, 212-875-5601, filmlinc.com; $15; $7.50 for members and their children when buying a minimum of one adult ticket and one child ticket. Image Subway cars from the 1930s, like this one, will run on Saturday. Credit James Giovan ‘Jazzed! The Changing Beat of 125th Street’ (Friday through Sunday, and Tuesday through Thursday) Young visitors may want to put on their dancing shoes before they visit this new show at the Children’s Museum of Manhattan. Then again, on certain days they can just wait and make a pair there. Presented in conjunction with the National Jazz Museum in Harlem, this exhibition revisits the Harlem Renaissance with displays dedicated to major jazz figures, highlighting Ella Fitzgerald, Bill (Bojangles) Robinson and Duke Ellington. Activities include song, dance, investigations of musical composition and craft workshops that include, yes, building your own tap shoes. Performances will be a regular part of the show, including concerts this weekend at 3 and 4 p.m. by Yacouba Sissoko (Saturday) and Sam Newsome (Sunday). (Through Dec. 31.) From 10 a.m. to 5 p.m.; until 7 p.m. on Saturdays; open until 8 p.m. the first Friday of every month; Tisch Building, 212 West 83rd Street, 212-721-1223, cmom.org. Free with admission: $11; $7 for 65+; free for members and under 1. Ezra Jack Keats Family Concert: Ozomatli’s Ozokidz (Saturday) Evocative words and images were the stock in trade of the children’s author and illustrator Ezra Jack Keats, and this annual event with readings, part of the Celebrate Brooklyn! festival, adds another element: music. The band will be Ozomatli, a Los Angeles group known for its lively combination of styles, including hip-hop, Latin, R&B and New Orleans second line, and for its 2012 family album, “Ozomatli Presents Ozokidz.” Mark Stewart, a co-founder of Bang on a Can All-Stars, will read from Keats’s books. At 4 p.m.; gates open at 3 p.m.; Prospect Park Bandshell, Prospect Park West and Ninth Street, Park Slope, 718-683-5600, bricartsmedia.org/cb; free. Kid Cool Theremin School (Saturday) Yes, it’s great to study the piano or the flute or the trumpet. But imagine being able to say that you play the theremin. That’s really cool — or at least that’s what the New York Theremin Society will try to persuade young people in its first theremin workshop for kids. This crash course, taught by Dorit Chrysler and Rob Schwimmer, will teach how to play the instrument, but even if participants don’t emerge as experts, they’ll refine their motor skills and train their ears. At 11 a.m. (ages 4 through 6) and 12:15 p.m. (ages 7 and older), Pioneer Works, 159 Pioneer Street, at Imlay Street, Red Hook, Brooklyn, 718-596-3000, bit.ly/1oeLQdm; $30; free for accompanying adults. (Space is limited.) Kids in the Square (Thursday) That’s Union Square Park in Manhattan, which has more than playgrounds and lush grass to lure children this summer. Every Thursday through Aug. 7, the square will offer family activities and free entertainment, starting at 10 a.m. with Yoga Story Time from the yoga studio Karma Kids in the Pavilion, on the South Lawn. At 11 a.m., the schedule always includes a concert or show on the South Plaza. This week it’s “Little Red’s Hood,” a marionette production. East 14th to East 17th Streets, Broadway to Fourth Avenue, unionsquarenyc.org; free. ‘The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe’ (Saturday) If the children of the Pevensie family could travel to the magical land of Narnia through something as simple as a wardrobe, why shouldn’t two hard-working actors be able to play them and all the characters found there? That’s what Abigail Taylor-Sansom and her husband, Rockford Sansom, who recently joined the cast, are attempting in the Off Broadway Family Theater’s first production, le Clanché du Rand’s adaptation of C. S. Lewis’s classic novel. (The run is open-ended.) Saturdays at 11 a.m., St. Luke’s Theater, 308 West 46th Street, Clinton, 212-239-6200, narniaoffbroadway.com; $35. Mad. Sq. Kids (Tuesday and Thursday) The kids attending won’t have to worry about being mad or square: The entertainment is fun and hip in this summer series of hourlong concerts in Madison Square Park. The events continue on Tuesday with Audra Rox, a Brooklyn mom and bandleader who rocks indeed, and on Thursday with “Rabbit Days and Dumplings,” a celebration of folk and children’s music from East Asia, infused with other cultural traditions. At 10:30 a.m., Oval Lawn, 23rd Street between Madison and Fifth Avenues, madisonsquarepark.org; free. MoMA Art Lab: Movement (Friday through Thursday) It’s easy to think of art as monumental and fixed, but many creative works move, or at least appear to. This interactive space for children at the Museum of Modern Art is devoted to the idea of motion, whether it’s in a mobile, a moving picture, a performance or the artist’s hand applying paint. Activities in the lab relate to different works in the museum’s collection: Preschoolers can build structures incorporating movement; older children can try their hands at stop-motion animation. Related programs include drawing or art-making sessions for ages 5 and older on Fridays at 4:30 p.m., and story time followed by related art projects for ages 2 and older on Tuesdays at 11 a.m. (Through Aug. 31.) Daily from 10:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m.; to 6:30 p.m. on Fridays; Lewis B. and Dorothy Cullman Education and Research Building, 4 West 54th Street, Manhattan, 212-708-9400, moma.org/artlab. Free with museum admission: $25; $18 for 65+; $14 for students; free for ages 16 and under. ‘Monday Night Magic’ (Monday) This show bills itself as the longest-running Off Broadway entertainment of its kind. (It opened in 1997.) Every Monday a different group of magicians appears (or disappears, as the case may be), offering illusions, sleight of hand and an occasional thrill like knife throwing. The performers planned for this week are Dave Chandler, Chris McDaniel and Michael Chaut. At 8 p.m., Players Theater, 115 Macdougal Street, at Minetta Lane, Greenwich Village, 800-551-4767, hollywoodpop.com/mondaynightmagic; $66.50 to $72.50; $10 discounts available on phone orders with the codes HPG-Prem or HPG-VIP. ‘My Superhero, Roberto Clemente’ (Saturday) Roberto Clemente (1934-72) may not have had superpowers, but he was certainly a hero, both on and off the baseball field. Battling discrimination throughout his sports career, he became the first Latino athlete inducted into the Baseball Hall of Fame, and died while trying to help others: he was killed in the crash of a plane he had chartered to deliver aid to earthquake victims in Nicaragua. This new bilingual children’s musical from Teatro SEA, written by Manuel Antonio Morán and Alejandro Zuleta, focuses on a boy named Bobby, who, with his friends, discovers Clemente’s legacy. (Through June 21.) At 3 p.m., Los Kabayitos Puppet and Children’s Theater, Clemente Soto Vélez Cultural Center, 107 Suffolk Street, at Rivington Street, Lower East Side, 212-529-1545, teatrosea.org; $18; $15 for children; free for those who dress up as superheroes or members of their favorite baseball team. ‘Mysteries of the Unseen World’ (Friday through Thursday) Eyelash mites, bacteria, lice: You may feel that some subjects in “Mysteries of the Unseen World,” the new Imax film at the American Museum of Natural History, are actually best unseen. But that would be a shame. Although this movie, the first at the museum in digital 3-D, has disquieting moments, it also offers dazzling ones, showing organisms and processes that are too small, too fast, too slow or just plain invisible to the human eye. These include flowers blooming, water drops bouncing and dragonflies’ four wings moving in different directions simultaneously. (Through July 6.) Hourly, from 10:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m., with the 3-D screenings at 10:30 a.m. and 12:30, 1:30, 2:30 and 4:30 p.m. (Other showings are 2-D.) Central Park West and 79th Street, 212-769-5200, amnh.org. Included in Museum Plus One admission (general admission and one Imax film or special exhibition): $27; $22 for students and 60+; $16 for ages 2 to 12. Member tickets: $13.50; $8.50 for children. NYC KidsFest (Sunday) This annual celebration gathers arts and crafts, storytellers and children’s theater, musical and dance groups all under one roof: the open sky. This year the highlights include Mr. Aubrey’s Show Kids, young dancers trained by Aubrey Lynch II, who will give a workshop after their performance; the National Double Dutch League; music groups like Folkfoot and B Imperio; and, once again, the Brazilian athlete Carlos Oliveira, offering a soccer demonstration. From noon to 5 p.m., Morningside Park, Morningside Drive and 114th Street, Morningside Heights, nyckidsfest.org; free. (Rain date, June 22.) Pier Kids: Block Party With the Brooklyn Children’s Museum (Sunday) Pier 6 in Brooklyn Bridge Park will become an extension of the Brooklyn Children’s Museum at this event, which will include building activities from the museum and learning about health from an oversize puppet. It’s all part of Pier Kids, a new family entertainment series that also includes art making. (Series runs through Aug. 3.) At 11 a.m., Atlantic Avenue and Furman Street, Brooklyn Heights, brooklynbridgepark.org/events; free. Puppetworks (Saturday and Sunday) Animals of all kinds will be frolicking onstage — with musical accompaniment — in the latest show from Puppetworks, whose artistic director, Nicolas Coppola, has adapted three famous tales for his marionette theater: “Peter & the Wolf,” with Prokofiev’s score; “The Frog Prince,” with music from Kabalevsky’s “The Comedians”; and “The Ugly Duckling,” which features shadow puppets. All three are being performed in just an hour. (Through Aug. 17.) Weekends at 12:30 and 2:30 p.m., 338 Sixth Avenue, at Fourth Street, Park Slope, Brooklyn, 718-965-3391, puppetworks.org; $9; $8 for children. Reservations are recommended. ‘Romeo and Juliet’ (Friday through Sunday) Children may not be ready for hours of Shakespearean verse, but this new interpretation, lasting just 60 minutes and closing this weekend, translates the story of the star-crossed lovers into contemporary dance. Choreographed by Matthew Westerby to excerpts from Prokofiev’s ballet score, this production features children and older adults from the Hudson Guild’s programs, as well as young professionals from Mr. Westerby’s company. Friday at 8 p.m.; Saturday at 2 p.m.; Sunday at 3 p.m.; Hudson Guild Theater, 441 West 26th Street, Chelsea, 212-760-9817. Admission is pay what you wish. ‘Samba, Soccer and Sugarloaf!’ (Saturday) These three S’s add up to one big B: Brazil. In this event, part of the Chelsea Music Festival, children 3 to 12 are invited to sample the food, art and melodies (of course) of this Latin country. The festivities will include playing Brazilian rhythms, cooking a recipe with a chef, making artwork with professional guidance and learning about Brazil’s soccer prowess. The fun will conclude with a Sugar Loaf scavenger hunt, in honor of that mountain in Rio de Janeiro. At 10:30 a.m., St. Paul’s German Lutheran Church, 315 West 22nd Street, Chelsea, chelseamusicfestival.org; $30 a family (up to two adults and two children). Individual tickets are $15; $8 for children. Stories at the Statue of Hans Christian Andersen (Saturday) Not everything that blooms perennially in Central Park is a flower or a tree. Storytelling also returns there each summer, as the city’s Parks and Recreation Department, the Central Park Conservancy and the Hans Christian Andersen Storytelling Center bring narrative performers to Andersen’s statue every Saturday. The series, for ages 6 and older, continues this Saturday with Ron Sopyla relating Andersen’s “The Wild Swans,” and Peninnah Schram and a youth storyteller offering the Jewish tale “The Magic Pomegranate.” At 11 a.m., inside the park at 72nd Street and Fifth Avenue, rain or shine, hcastorycenter.org; free. Sunset Eco-Cruises to the Harbor Heron Islands (Sunday) Herons, egrets and ibises are New Yorkers too, and about 3,000 reside on the islands around the city harbor. This series of cruises from New York City Audubon visits the birds’ lairs and provides binoculars for close-up viewing. Gabriel Willow, a naturalist and storyteller, narrates the adventures, conducted via New York Water Taxi. This trip, the second of the season, is the Bridges & Birds Eco-Cruise, featuring Governors Island and the Verrazano Bridge, with many egrets and herons. From 7 to 9 p.m., Pier 17, South Street Seaport, Fulton and South Streets, Lower Manhattan, 212-742-1969, nywatertaxi.com/tours/audubon; $40; $30 for ages 3 through 12; free for under 3. ‘Uptown Family Swing’ (Saturday) Imagine that “The Nutcracker” had a jazz equivalent. This dance theater piece, choreographed by Aubrey Lynch II to the music of Duke Ellington, takes place in Jazzland, where the Dancing Rhythms and the Soldiers of Sound do battle, and where evil forces threaten the Queen of Jam’s reign. The hero, Little Duke, works to save the day with his magic trumpet. Performed by the Jazz at Lincoln Center Orchestra, with Wynton Marsalis, and nearly 100 students from local schools, the show includes Ellington pieces like “Happy Go Lucky Local” and “It Don’t Mean a Thing (if It Ain’t Got That Swing).” At 5 p.m., United Palace Theater, 4140 Broadway, at 175th Street, Washington Heights, 212-258-9870, jalc.org; free, first come first served. (Theatergoers should arrive at least a half-hour early to secure seats.) ‘A Voyage Through Jewish History’ (Sunday through Thursday) This journey involves not just miles, but years. In this new permanent interactive exhibition at the Jewish Children’s Museum, young visitors can travel from Abraham and Sarah’s tent to the Western Wall in contemporary Jerusalem and beyond. Activities along the way include giving water to Rebecca’s camels, playing the strings on David’s harp (a high-tech version with beams of light that emit sounds when struck) and taking part in the exodus from Egypt. This Sunday, at 12:30 and 2:30 p.m., the museum will also hold its final “Torah Unwrapped” workshop, in which children can learn about torahs, mix ink, scrape hides for parchment and watch a scribe do his work. Usual museum hours are Mondays through Thursdays, 10 a.m. to 4 p.m.; until 5:30 p.m. on Sundays; 792 Eastern Parkway, at Kingston Avenue, Crown Heights, Brooklyn, 718-907-8833, jcm.museum; $13; $10 for 65+; free for under 2. ‘A Year With Children 2014’ (Friday through Wednesday) Most of the artists whose work is displayed at the Guggenheim Museum are well known. But now the museum is showing pieces by young — very young — aspiring artists. These are the projects created by students in Grades 2 through 6 who have taken part in the museum’s Learning Through Art program, which sends artists into public schools to teach skills and techniques. About 100 works from 11 schools are in the show, which closes on Wednesday, including drawings, paintings, collages, sculptures and photographs. From 10 a.m. to 5:45 p.m.; until 7:45 p.m. on Saturdays; 1071 Fifth Avenue, at 89th Street, 212-423-3500, guggenheim.org. Free with admission: $22; $18 for 65+ and students; free for children under 12 and members; pay what you wish on Saturday from 5:45 to 7:45 p.m. LAUREL GRAEBER A version of this article appears in print on , on Page C 32 of the New York edition with the headline: Spare Times: For Children . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              