   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Soccer Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Countdown to 2014 World Cup in Brazil: Day 12 Image Diego Costa, right, played only nine minutes in last week's Champions League final when Real Madrid defeated Atlético Madrid, 4-1, in extra time. Credit Gerard Julien/Agence France-Presse — Getty Images By  Jack Bell May 31, 2014 The 2014 World Cup begins on June 12, when Brazil plays Croatia in the opening match. Reporters and editors for The Times will count down to the start of the tournament each day with a short capsule of news and interesting tidbits. The upside was simply too tantalizing to ignore for Spain Coach Vincente del Bosque, who named Atlético Madrid’s Brazilian-born striker Diego Costa to his final 23-man roster for the World Cup. All final rosters are to be submitted to FIFA by Monday. After saying last week that he was “not sure Costa will make it,” and “we’ve still got time but now it’s in the hands of the doctors and the medical team, we have to be cautious,” del Bosque decided that a nagging injury to Costa’s right thigh that limited him to less than a half-hour combined in the Champions League final and Atlético’s final Spanish league game against Barcelona was not enough to preclude taking Costa to Brazil. Spain will travel to the United States this week and play El Salvador next Saturday as part of a doubleheader with two Major League Soccer teams playing the other game at FedEx Field in Landover, Md. The Spanish team, which is bidding to win its fourth major title (European Championships in 2008 and 2012; and the World Cup in 2010) will then travel to Brazil and play in Group B, opening with the Netherlands (in a replay of the 2010 final in South Africa), then Chile and Australia. Spain is also trying to become the first back-to-back winners of the World Cup since Brazil in 1958 and 1962. Del Bosque included in the squad 16 players who were on the title-winning team in South Africa. He also said that he sees Costa as the linchpin of Spain’s attack, ahead of Fernando Torres and David Villa. Left off the team were Jesús Navas (who had been dealing with an ankle injury late in the season with Manchester City), Fernando Llorente, Álvaro Negredo and Isco; while Thiago Alcântara was also ruled out because of injury. The roster: Goalkeepers Iker Casillas (Real Madrid), Pepe Reina (Napoli), David de Gea (Manchester United) Defenders César Azpilicueta (Chelsea), Sergio Ramos (Real Madrid), Gerard Piqué (Barcelona), Javi Martínez (Bayern Munich), Raúl Albiol (Napoli), Jordi Alba (Barcelona), Juanfran Torres (Atlético Madrid) Midfielders Xavi Hernández (Barcelona), Sergio Busquets (Barcelona), Xabi Alonso (Real Madrid), Santi Cazorla (Arsenal), Cesc Fàbregas (Barcelona), David Silva (Manchester City), Andrés Iniesta (Barcelona), Koke (Atlético Madrid), Juan Mata (Manchester United) Forwards Pedro Rodríguez (Barcelona), Fernando Torres (Chelsea), David Villa (Atlético Madrid), Diego Costa (Atlético Madrid) Image Robin van Persie, left, and Netherlands Coach Louis van Gaal. After the World Cup, the two will be teamed again when van Gaal takes over at Manchester United. Credit Damien Meyer/Agence France-Presse — Getty Images The Netherlands Coach Louis van Gaal, who is headed to Manchester United after the World Cup, went with experience up front and hope in defense when he named his 23-man roster on Saturday. In the attack, the Dutch team will pin its hopes on Robin van Persie, Arjen Robben and Wesley Sneijder, who will be pressed into duty in the absence of the injured Rafael van der Vaart. In addition to van der Vaart, who was injured in training last week, van Gaal is missing midfielder Kevin Strootman and defender Gregory van der Wiel. The threesome up front have made a combine 253 international appearances while the eight defenders have a total of only 75. The youthful defense includes Terence Kongolo, 20, who has only 45 minutes of senior international soccer, while Joel Veltman and Paul Verhaegh each has two caps. The roster: Goalkeepers Michel Vorm (Swansea City), Tim Krul (Newcastle United), Jasper Cillessen (Ajax). Defenders Ron Vlaar (Aston Villa), Daryl Janmaat (Feyenoord), Bruno Martins Indi (Feyenoord), Stefan de Vrij (Feyenoord), Daley Blind (Ajax), Paul Verhaegh (Augsburg), Joel Veltman (Ajax), Terence Kongolo (Feyenoord). Midfielders Wesley Sneijder (Galatasary), Nigel de Jong (Milan), Jonathan de Guzman (Swansea City), Jordy Clasie (Feyenoord), Leroy Fer (Norwich City), Georginio Wijnaldum (P.S.V.). Forwards Dirk Kuyt (Fenerbahce), Robin van Persie (Manchester United), Arjen Robben (Bayern Munich), Klaas Jan Huntelaar (Schalke), Jeremain Lens (Dinamo Kiev), Memphis Depay (P.S.V.). Notes Ivory Coast defender Kolo Touré has contracted malaria and is likely to miss the World Cup. The team’s medical staff said that the Liverpool player mostly likely contracted the illness on a trip to Abidjan, the Ivorian capital, before he traveled to Dallas to join the team for training. Touré took ill on the flight from Dallas to St. Louis, where Ivory Coast lost, 2-1, to Bosnia and Herzegovina in a friendly match Friday night Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              