   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Sports Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Sports Briefing In His Return, Dustin Johnson Is Satisfied With a 70 Image Dustin Johnson playing an approach shot Thursday at the Wells Fargo Championship. He is at two under. Credit Streeter Lecka/Getty Images By  The Associated Press May 5, 2017 Six weeks away from competition did not keep Dustin Johnson from extending one streak Thursday, with hopes of adding to another. Johnson showed more game than rust at the Wells Fargo Championship, where he missed only two greens — and plenty of putts — for a two-under-par 70 that left him four shots behind the leader Francesco Molinari at blustery Eagle Point Golf Club in Wilmington, N.C. It was Johnson’s 13th consecutive round at par or better. Johnson was not as flawless as he looked while winning three straight tournaments, though he had few complaints under the circumstances. It was his first time playing since he slipped in his socks down the stairs at his rental house in Augusta, Ga., hurting his back and knocking himself out of the Masters. “Since I hadn’t played in so long, I’m happy with the way I played,” Johnson said. “I didn’t score that great, didn’t really hole that many putts, but other than that, I played really well. I think I hit 16 greens, and I hit the ball great.” On greens that were slightly softer and as pure as can be, Molinari ran off five birdies in a seven-hole stretch on the front nine and closed out his round with a 20-foot birdie putt on the par-5 18th. That gave him a one-shot lead over Alex Noren of Sweden, J. B. Holmes, Grayson Murray and Brian Campbell. KO WINS IN MATCH PLAY Lydia Ko beat the home favorite Ana Menendez, and the Jutanugarn sisters set up a second-round showdown in the Lorena Ochoa Match Play in Mexico City. The top-ranked Ko edged Menendez, 3 and 2, at Club de Golf Mexico in the event, which switched from stroke to match play and from November to May. Third-ranked Ariya Jutanugarn will face her older sister Moriya in the second round. Ariya beat Amy Anderson, 5 and 4, and Moriya topped Alena Sharp, 2 and 1. SOCCER United Prevails in Europa League Marcus Rashford scored from a free kick in the second half as Manchester United beat Celta Vigo, 1-0, in the first leg of their Europa League semifinal in Vigo, Spain. Rashford, who netted an extra-time winner against Anderlecht in the quarterfinals, drove a right-foot strike over the wall and into the top corner in the 67th minute, securing United the advantage going into the second leg in Manchester, England, next week. VOLLEYBALL Walsh Jennings Rejects Tour Agreement The five-time Olympian Kerri Walsh Jennings is looking for a new partner — and a new beach volleyball tour — after rejecting an exclusivity agreement with the AVP. The deal would have locked her into the circuit through the 2020 Summer Games in Tokyo. In her first public comments since breaking with the tour, Walsh Jennings said that the deal was “a death sentence for our sport.” The decision to opt out of the AVP tour also means Walsh Jennings will split with April Ross, her partner in Rio de Janeiro, where they won the Olympic bronze medal. HOCKEY Crosby Skating, but Return Is Unclear Pittsburgh Penguins captain Sidney Crosby is skating again, but Coach Mike Sullivan provided no update on when his star would be ready to return from a concussion. Crosby sat out Pittsburgh’s 3-2 victory on Wednesday night in Game 4 of its Eastern Conference semifinal against Washington. His second concussion of the season was diagnosed after Crosby took a crosscheck in the head from Capitals defenseman Matt Niskanen. Sullivan said Crosby was “in the process of rehabbing” but declined to answer when asked if there was a chance that Crosby would play in Washington on Saturday. BASKETBALL Decision on Religious Headgear Is Lauded Basketball enthusiasts around the world said a decision to allow players to wear religious headgear in competition would encourage more people to play the sport because it would give participants the right to practice their faith while playing ball. The unanimous vote by international basketball’s governing body, known as FIBA, will allow female players to wear hijabs and male players to wear turbans or skullcaps, overturning a ban imposed for safety reasons 20 years ago. COLLEGES Former Iowa Administrator Wins Lawsuit A jury has ruled that the former University of Iowa athletic administrator Jane Meyer was the victim of discrimination, retaliation and unequal pay and awarded her $1.4 million in total damages. Meyer alleged she had suffered workplace discrimination as a gay woman in a relationship with the field hockey coach Tracey Griesbaum, that the university had retaliated against her for complaining about Griesbaum’s firing and that she had been paid less than a male counterpart for similar work. BASEBALL In Atlanta, Rain Pours on a Mets Lead After a two-hour rain delay in the fourth inning, the Mets’ game against the Braves in Atlanta was postponed. A makeup date will be announced at a later date, and the game will be played from scratch. Thursday’s game was paused with the Mets leading, 3-1. Zack Wheeler threw 68 pitches over three innings and allowed one run on three hits. JAMES WAGNER ORIOLES’ WIN ENDS TENSE SERIES Manny Machado hit a long three-run shot for his third homer of the series, and the Baltimore Orioles capped four tense days at Fenway Park with an 8-3 win over the Boston Red Sox. In a four-game set marred by beanballs, brushbacks and racial rancor, the finale was a sedate affair decided in the fourth when the Orioles turned a two-run deficit into a 6-3 lead. SCHERZER BOUNCES BACK Max Scherzer struck out a season-high 11 to bounce back from his worst outing this season, and the Nationals defeated the Arizona Diamondbacks, 4-2, in Washington. Scherzer (4-2) allowed one run and two hits in seven innings. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page B 10 of the New York edition with the headline: Golf; In His Return, Johnson Is Satisfied With a 70 . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Related Coverage Missing Sidney Crosby, Penguins Hold On to Win May 3, 2017 Image Jamaal Charles Signs With the Broncos May 2, 2017 Liverpool Boosts Champions League Bid May 2, 2017 Image Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              