   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Briefing Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Keystone Pipeline, Border Wall, Supreme Court: Your Wednesday Briefing Image A protest in New York on Tuesday after President Trump signed an executive order reviving two oil pipeline projects. Credit Stephanie Keith/Reuters By  Sean Alfano Jan. 25, 2017 (Want to get this briefing by email? Here’s the sign-up .) Good morning. Here’s what you need to know: • Steps toward an immigration crackdown. President Trump is expected to announce plans today for one of his campaign’s signature promises, the construction of a wall along the Mexican border . Mr. Trump also intends to slash the number of refugees who can move to the U.S., including from Syria and other majority-Muslim nations. And he is standing by his false allegation that extensive voter fraud cost him the popular vote, by promising a “major investigation.” Election officials have said there is no evidence to support his claim. • Supreme Court pick expected soon. Mr. Trump wrote on Twitter that he would select a nominee next Thursday to fill the vacancy created by the death of Justice Antonin Scalia almost a year ago. Three leading contenders are Judge William H. Pryor Jr. of the federal appeals court in Atlanta, Judge Neil M. Gorsuch of the federal appeals court in Denver and Judge Thomas M. Hardiman of the federal appeals court in Philadelphia. Democrats, furious that Senate Republicans refused to even consider President Barack Obama’s nominee for the post, have vowed to embrace similar tactics . • Other highlights from Trump’s busy day. The president cleared the way for two major oil projects that had been blocked by his predecessor, the Keystone XL pipeline and one in North Dakota that had drawn protests led by Native Americans. Image President Trump’s decision to revive two oil pipeline projects was his latest effort to unravel the policies of the Obama administration. Credit Doug Mills/The New York Times And on Twitter, he threatened to “ send in the Feds ” if Chicago didn’t do more to combat violent crime. • On the front lines in Iraq. A photographer for The Times is in Mosul, where the fight to retake the city from Islamic State militants is far from over. Image A burial for Zaid Khalid Mohammed, an Iraqi teenager who was killed by a roadside bomb. Credit Ivor Prickett for The New York Times He described the humanitarian situation in the eastern part of the city, where the battle is most intense, as “dire.” • Political scrambling in Europe. In the Netherlands, the center-right prime minister is hoping to outflank  his far-right opponents by embracing some of their populist messages, including a tougher stance on immigration. The elections are in March. And many workers in northern France are embracing right-wing populism ahead of the presidential election in April and May. The Times Magazine looks at whether the trend indicates the death of social democracy . • Medical breakthrough is questioned. Drugs approved in recent years to cure hepatitis C may have serious side effects including liver failure, and they warrant further study, a report out today says. Business • The federal debt is projected to grow nearly $10 trillion over the next 10 years, according to the Congressional Budget Office. It added that the share of debt held by the public was expected to reach 89 percent of gross domestic product in 2027, a level that could increase the risk of a financial crisis. • Men have been the focus of concern about Americans who are neither working nor looking for jobs. But in the U.S., unlike in most industrialized countries, the trend also applies to women . • A new report reviews the law schools that provide graduates with the best salary-to-debt ratios . Many elite universities make the cut, but the best return on investment might be from Brigham Young University, the findings suggest. • U.S. stocks were up on Tuesday. Here’s a snapshot of global markets . Noteworthy • Journey to the center … of North America. Video There’s a monument in Rugby, N.D., that claims to mark the exact geographic center of North America. But new research indicates the real center is 145 miles away. Published On Jan. 25, 2017 Credit Image by KC McGinnis for The New York Times. Technology by Samsung. A monument in Rugby, N.D., has claimed that geographic distinction, but the real location may be 145 miles away. Our 360 video explains . • “I just couldn’t cope with the anticipation.” That was Naomie Harris, who said she was too nervous to keep watching the Oscar nomination announcements on Tuesday and turned off her TV. Her brother called to tell her that she got a nod for best supporting actress for her role in “Moonlight.” Image The British actress Naomie Harris is one of six black performers to get Oscar nominations this year. Credit Stephanie Keith/Reuters Here are reactions from other nominees, and a list of the snubs and surprises . Get a head start on filling out your Oscar ballot here . • From our archives. In a four-week series, we’ll be looking at how The Times’s wedding reporting has evolved . Our first wedding announcement, on Sept. 18, 1851, was for Sarah Mullett and John Grant. Their descendants gather every year for a family photo with the ancestral portraits. We’re also featuring this week the 1895 nuptials of the muckraking journalist Ida B. Wells, a black woman born into slavery 33 years earlier. Her wedding was Page 1 news. Smarter Living: Morning Edition • Doing just  12 minutes of yoga regularly can improve your bone health. • Vacations don’t have to be only about relaxing: Here’s how to plan one that includes good deeds. • Recipe of the day: Try this grilled cheese sandwich featuring mayonnaise for some midweek comfort food. Back Story Grandstands filled with cheering fans, perfectly plated vegetables, and your country’s name on the line — this isn’t your typical cooking competition. This is the Bocuse d’Or , the culinary version of the Olympics. Image Preparing chickens on Tuesday, the first day in the final of this year’s Bocuse d’Or. Credit Zsolt Szigetvary/European Pressphoto Agency The competition, which takes place this week in Lyon, France, was founded by the master French chef Paul Bocuse. He was influential in establishing nouvelle cuisine, which emphasizes ingredients and presentation. At 90, Mr. Bocuse remains a king among chefs. Long before “farm-to-table” became a trendy concept, a 15-year-old Bocuse was learning how to butcher a cow for his first restaurant job. He eventually joined his father at their family restaurant, L’Auberge du Pont de Collonges . One year after he took over, the restaurant was awarded a Michelin star. He recalled how, early in his career, he wowed a prominent food critic with fresh ingredients. Mr. Bocuse had served haricots verts picked that morning, lightly boiled and served with olive oil, shallots and salt. In 1966, The Times’s Craig Claiborne described the restaurant near Lyon as “ one of the most elegant and proudest restaurants outside of Paris .” Mr. Bocuse, though, once offered a less refined assessment of his skills. “Some men have mistresses,” Mr. Bocuse once said . “I run a luxury restaurant.” Remy Tumin contributed reporting. _____ Photographs may appear out of order for some readers. Viewing this version of the briefing should help. Your Morning Briefing is published weekdays at 6 a.m. Eastern and updated on the web all morning . What would you like to see here? Contact us at briefing@nytimes.com . You can sign up here to get the briefing delivered to your inbox. Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              