   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Movies Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Movie Listings for April 11-17 April 10, 2014 Ratings and running times are in parentheses; foreign films have English subtitles. Full reviews of all current releases: nytimes.com/movies. ‘About Last Night’ (R, 1:40) This remake and update of the ’80s Demi Moore-Rob Lowe rom-com, based on David Mamet’s play, moves the action to Los Angeles, where two couples negotiate the complexities of heterosexual courtship. Bernie (Kevin Hart) and Joan (Regina Hall) pursue an on-again-off-again, emotionally volatile, sexually adventurous relationship, while Danny (Michael Ealy) and Debbie (Joy Bryant) proceed from dating to cohabitation and pet ownership. Danny and Debbie are dull and likable in the usual Valentine-movie way, but Bernie and Joan provide some raunchy laughs as well as a bit of romantic wisdom. (A.O. Scott) ‘Alan Partridge’ (R, 1:30) The title character, an obnoxious broadcaster played by Steve Coogan (and a fixture of British telly for almost 20 years), becomes embroiled in a hostage situation at the provincial radio station where he holds down an afternoon D.J. slot. Though the humor is better suited to short-form comedy than a feature, the movie will delight devotees of Mr. Coogan’s abrasive, waspish and strangely charming brand of satire. (Scott) ★ ‘American Hustle’ (R, 2:09) David O. Russell directs this wonderfully pleasurable comedy, a Martin Scorsese screwball that’s very (very) loosely based on the 1970s Abscam scandal and which finds a brilliant Christian Bale playing a molting con man who’s the Cary Grant to Amy Adams’s Rosalind Russell. Jennifer Lawrence and Bradley Cooper also co-star in the film, which is one of the year’s best and one of its most fun. (Manohla Dargis) ★ ‘Anita’ (No rating, 1:17) Freida Mock’s documentary about Anita Hill, who accused Clarence Thomas of sexual harassment during his Supreme Court confirmation hearings, segues from the hearings in 1991 to the present, where Ms. Hill is seen in a context of power as she speaks in front of rooms full of women in her new role as an activist. (Miriam Bale) ‘Bad Words’ (R, 1:29) Jason Bateman, making his feature directing debut, stars in this would-be gonzo comedy about an unwelcome participant and universally loathed champion in a national spelling bee where everyone else is decades younger. Written by Andrew Dodge, the movie has a tough exterior and a marshmallow center and while it would be something to see Mr. Bateman go authentically dark, sometimes it’s enough just to watch him pop his eyes, furrow his brow and show off his excellent timing. (Dargis) ‘Captain America: The Winter Soldier” (PG-13, 2:16) Chris Evans squeezes into the form-fitting corporate brand once again for this sequel, which is quite fun until it loses steam and goes kablooey. Given how little creative wiggle room there is in properties like this, it’s a minor triumph that the directors, the brothers Anthony and Joe Russo, imprint any personality on the movie — less a stand-alone work than a part of an ever-expanding multimedia enterprise. (Dargis) ‘Cesar Chavez’ (PG-13, 1:38) The story of the United Farm Workers in the 1960s is the subject of this earnest, conventional biopic, directed by Diego Luna and starring Michael Peña in the title role. There is too much telegraphed inspiration, and not enough illumination, which is a shame since some of the issues Chavez faced could hardly be more timely. (Scott) ‘Dallas Buyers Club’ (R, 2:00) Skinny and fierce, Matthew McConaughey brings terrific energy to the role of Ron Woodroof, a Texan who receives a diagnosis of H.I.V. in the mid-1980s. The film, directed by Jean-Marc Vallée, chronicles Ron’s transformation from a homophobic hedonist into a medical crusader, bringing experimental (and at the time unapproved) drugs to desperate patients. It is an inspiring story, but the movie, Mr. McConaughey’s performance notwithstanding, is too predictable and conventional to do justice to its political and social dimensions. (Scott) ‘Divergent’ (PG-13, 2:23) Shailene Woodley stars as Tris Prior in this adaptation of the first book in Veronica Roth’s young adult series. It’s another dystopian tale that pivots on a gutsy teenage heroine, one living in a postwar Chicago. For all its similarities to “The Hunger Games,” “Divergent” isn’t as interesting partly because Tris spends a lot of time wondering why her cute male instructor pays attention to her: The story celebrates individuality and breaking out of the little boxes that its authoritarian leaders (i.e., adults) put teenagers in, even as it sticks to the usual gender template. The director, Neal Burger, gives you little to hang on to — beauty, thrills, a visual style. (Dargis) ★ ‘Elaine Stritch: Shoot Me’ (No rating, 1:20) This late-life portrait of the great Broadway and cabaret entertainer, now 89, is a moving bone-deep X-ray of an indefatigable woman who is described as a “Molotov cocktail of madness, sanity and genius.” (Stephen Holden) ‘Enemy’ (R, 1:30) Jake Gyllenhaal plays a Canadian professor whose glum, routinized life is turned upside down when he discovers that he has a double, an amoral actor also played by Mr. Gyllenhaal. Adapting a novella by the Portuguese Nobel laureate José Saramago, Denis Villeneuve (“Incendies,” “Prisoners”) has made an enjoyable creepy psychological thriller that is perhaps not as profound as it dreams of being. (Scott) ★ ‘Ernest & Celestine’ (PG, 1:20, in either French or English) A tale of mice and bears, derring-do and dentistry, this lovely animated movie about would-be foes who become friends originated in a cycle of children’s books by the Belgian writer and artist Gabrielle Vincent. The books have simple stories and enchanting illustrations by Vincent that are characterized by graceful lines, muted colors and blurred edges, which focuses your attention on animals that, in their poignant delicacy, evoke Beatrix Potter. The screen character designs are broader and more overtly comic, but the three directors — Benjamin Renner, Vincent Patar and Stéphane Aubier — have retained enough of Vincent’s charming vision that the movie feels intimate and personal, as if it, too, had sprung from a single hand. (Dargis) ‘Exposed’ (No rating, 1:17) Dancing on the wilder shores of burlesque, from Manhattan clubs to the Coney Island boardwalk, the eight performers profiled in Beth B’s joyfully explicit documentary blend politics, gender and sexuality into candid portraits of the person beneath the exhibition. (Jeannette Catsoulis) ‘Finding Vivian Maier’ (No rating, 1:23) An exciting electric current of discovery runs through John Maloof and Charlie Siskel’s documentary about the street photographer who worked as a care provider and never exhibited her work. Maier is a terrific story — part Mary Poppins, part Weegee — and the movie is a solid if finally thin introduction to her. It’s also, to state the obvious, a feature-length advertisement for Mr. Maloof’s commercial venture as the principal owner of her work and would have been stronger if it had dug into the complexities of what it means when one person assumes ownership of another’s art. (Dargis) ‘Flex Is Kings’ (No rating, 1:23) Two performers, the gregarious Flizzo and the mask-wearing Jay Donn, are the focus of this documentary about a Brooklyn street-dancing style reminiscent of vogueing, break dancing and miming. Though it lags at times, this fascinating film creates narrative tension between the improvised street style and the more formal modern performance. (Bale) ‘Frankie & Alice’ (R, 1:41) Halle Berry does the multiple-personality thing in this drama, which is said to be based on a true story. Frankie is a go-go dancer whose odd behavior catches the attention of a psychotherapist (Stellan Skarsgard). He documents her various personalities, which include a young girl and a white Southern racist. The acting is earnest, but the results feel ordinary. (Neil Genzlinger) ‘The French Minister (Quai D’Orsay)’ (No rating, 1:53, in French) Fires burn, simmer and die, only to rekindle, in Bertrand Tavernier’s sharp, sly comedy of manners and errors. The movie is based on “Quai d’Orsay,” a graphic novel illustrated by Christophe Blain, whose sharp caricatures and comic-book flourishes Mr. Tavernier has nicely translated to the screen. The book’s writer, Abel Lanzac, is a pseudonym for Antonin Baudry, a diplomat who based it on his experiences working for Dominique de Villepin (a terrific Thierry Lhermitte plays the fictionalized version), the foreign minister during the lead-up to the war in Iraq. (Dargis) ★ ‘Frozen’ (PG, 1:40) A beautiful princess with magical powers that she can’t control; an adorable snowman with buck teeth and a carrot for a nose who longs to sunbathe because no one ever told him that heat melts ice; a picture-perfect prince who is not what he appears to be: these are among the unconventional characters in the new Disney 3-D animated movie musical very loosely based on Hans Christian Andersen’s “The Snow Queen.” (Holden) ‘The Galapagos Affair: Satan Came to Eden’ (No rating, 2:00, in English and Spanish) This darkly amusing historical documentary, set in the early 1930s, explores the fruitless search for paradise on Earth by vainglorious world-weary dreamers who set themselves above and apart from the rest of humanity. The heart of the film, directed by Dayna Goldfine and Dan Geller (“Ballets Russes”) who wrote the screenplay with Celeste Schaefer Snyder, is a hybrid of juicy period soap opera and “Survivor.” (Holden) ★ ‘The Grand Budapest Hotel’ (R, 1:39) Wes Anderson’s latest film is whimsical, fussy and ingenious — a Wes Anderson film, in other words — but it is also a sly and touching engagement with some of the ugliest parts of 20th-century European history. Ralph Fiennes plays a hotel concierge in the fictional Central-European republic of Zubrowka in the fateful year of 1932. The frames are beautifully composed, the production design exquisite and a large cast is dispatched on a complex caper. But all the fun is shadowed by — and is a brilliant protest against — some very cruel realities. (Scott) ★ ‘Gravity’ (PG-13, 1:30) Alfonso Cuarón’s gripping, spectacular film about astronauts in peril is less a science-fiction story than a lean and simple tale of the struggle to survive. Sandra Bullock and George Clooney are the space travelers orbiting the Earth, but the real star is Mr. Cuarón’s breathtaking sense of scale and movement. He also grounds his technical bravura in a friendly, low-key humanism, and the result is a movie that is at once cosmic and intimate. (Scott) ★ ‘The Great Beauty’ (No rating, 2:22, in Italian) This deliriously alive movie from the Italian director Paolo Sorrentino tells the story of a man, a city, a country and a cinema, though not necessarily in that order. Set in Rome, it follows Jep (a sybarite played with a veneer of wit and fathomless soul by the great actor Toni Servillo), who dances into the story while celebrating his 65th birthday and slowly, stirringly, wakens to the world around him. A must-see. (Dargis) ★ ‘Her’ (R, 2:05) At once a brilliant conceptual gag and a deeply sincere romance, Spike Jonze’s exquisite new movie is an unlikely yet completely plausible love story set in the near-future about a man (a wonderful Joaquin Phoenix), who sometimes resembles a machine, and an operating system (voiced by Scarlett Johansson), who very much suggests a living woman. From Mr. Phoenix’s wide-open face to the diffused lighting and ravishingly lovely sherbet palette, this is a movie you want to reach out and caress, about a man who, like everyone else around him in this near future, has retreated from other people into a machine world. In “Her,” the great question isn’t whether machines can think, but whether human beings can still feel. (Dargis) ★ ‘Ilo Ilo’ (No rating, 1:39, in Mandarin, Tagalog and English) Anthony Chen’s small, wonderful first feature is an acutely perceptive examination of middle-class life in Singapore during a 1997 financial crisis that sent tremors of panic through Asia’s developing countries. Its semi-autobiographical story focuses on a family of three, with a baby on the way, suddenly facing uncertainty. (Holden) ‘In the Blood’ (R, 1:48) Free Gina Carano! This former mixed-martial artist has plummeted from the heights and all-star cast of Steven Soderbergh’s delightful 2012 revenge thriller, “Haywire,” and landed in this trifle, a Caribbean-set action thriller that squanders Ms. Carano. Somebody, please give this promising star a better script and director. (Andy Webster) ★ ‘It Felt Like Love’ (No rating, 1:22) Photographed with a soft light that makes skin tones sing, Eliza Hittman’s sensual and insightful first feature, set in a working-class Brooklyn neighborhood, observes a coltish 14-year-old (Gina Piersanti) who longs for sexual assurance and romantic connection. (Catsoulis) ‘Jinn’ (PG-13, 1:37) In Ajmal Zaheer Ahmad’s incoherent thriller, a car designer battles against the evil supernatural beings of the title. The movie resembles an overheated trailer for itself — a glaringly rough assembly of ill-staged computer-generated action sequences and assorted portentous moments. (Nicolas Rapold) ★ ‘Just a Sigh’ (No rating, 1:44, in French and English) In this contemporary Gallic answer to “Brief Encounter,” Emmanuelle Devos and Gabriel Byrne play a struggling French actress and an older British academic who meet by chance on a train and have a daylong fling. The narrative is episodic but the movie is beautifully acted. (Holden) ‘The Lego Movie’ (PG, 1:40) This movie is an energetic stew of visual wit, action, family-film sentiment and pop-culture japery, with lots of celebrity voices. What distinguishes it from lesser, merchandise-centric animated entertainment is its commitment to the discipline and endless creative potential of Lego itself. The filmmakers conjure a universe made of interlocking plastic blocks in which everything seems possible. (Scott) ★ ‘The Lunchbox’ (PG, 1:44, in Hindi) Ritesh Batra’s charming debut, set in Mumbai, refreshes an old and sturdy conceit (perhaps most familiar from “You’ve Got Mail”). Two lonely souls — a neglected young housewife (Nimrat Kaur) and a middle-aged, widowed office worker (Irrfan Khan) — pursue an anonymous correspondence that begins when a home-cooked lunch is delivered to the wrong place. (Scott) ★ ‘Mistaken for Strangers’ (No rating, 1:15) A shaggy ode to sibling reconnection, Tom Berninger’s scruffy, undisciplined documentary about his rocky relationship with his brother, Matt (the lead vocalist for the National), is pierced with touching moments of seemingly stumbled-upon clarity. (Catsoulis) ‘Mr. Peabody & Sherman’ (PG, 1:32) A dog and his boy, traveling through time. This latest bit of big-studio baby boomer pop-culture recycling is genial and witty, though not quite as aggressively brainy as the original Jay Ward animation. The goofy high spirits are marred by the kind of unthinking sexism that, even in the wake of “Brave” and “Frozen,” remains the default setting for feature-length animation. (Scott) ‘Muppets Most Wanted’ (PG, 1:47) In this follow-up to the 2011 Muppet movie, Kermit lands in a gulag while an evil frog who bears a striking resemblance to him takes his place on an international Muppet tour. The charm of the earlier film is replaced with plotting complexities, and the movie has more grown-up jokes than its predecessor. It’s sometimes funny but rarely lovable. (Genzlinger) ‘Need for Speed’ (PG-13, 2:10) This 3-D driving movie, adapted from a popular series of video games, aims for the unpretentious B-picture glory of the “Fast and Furious” franchise at its best. There are some good moments — thanks to Imogen Poots, Michael Keaton and a souped-up Mustang — but the cornball story and witless acting (including from Aaron Paul, the brooding lead) slow down the action and gum up the story. (Scott) ‘Noah’ (PG-13, 2:18) Darren Aronofsky’s version of the familiar Sunday school story is a scary, brooding environmental allegory, in which Noah (Russell Crowe) takes his divine instructions as a warrant for fanatical, almost genocidal behavior. Noah, assisted by stone giants, is pitted against Tubal-Cain (Ray Winstone), who wants to save corrupt humanity from its creator’s wrath. The movie is clumsy and not always coherent, but at its mad best it is a powerful, sincere attempt to find modern meanings in the Old Testament. (Scott) ‘Non-Stop’ (PG-13, 1:46) A satisfying, primitive bluntness distinguishes “Non-Stop,” which turns on an air marshal (Liam Neeson) who, during a super-bad flight, tries to stop an anonymous extortionist from killing a passenger every 20 minutes. The story is as nonsensical as it sounds, but the film’s director, Jaume Collet-Serra, has a sure genre hand and real feeling for what Mr. Neeson brings to the screen at this stage of his career. (Dargis) ‘Nymphomaniac: Volume I’ (No rating, 1:58) The title of Lars von Trier’s latest would-be provocation is preposterous, a huckster gimmick; it may also be a dig at those who, I think wrongly, label him a misogynist because of the abuse he rains down on his female characters. Women suffer in his work, yet they also dominate, shape and haunt it. That’s true of Joe (Charlotte Gainsbourg) who, over the course of this fitfully amusing sometimes explicit demi-movie, relates her sex life to a stranger (Stellan Skarsgard). And then the movie bluntly ends and the credits roll next to some teasing clips from “Volume II” that imply Joe’s sexcapades are about to turn very ugly or deeply silly, both being possible with Mr. von Trier. (Dargis) ‘Nymphomaniac: Volume II’ (No rating, 2:03) In the second half of Lars von Trier’s four-hour sex movie, Joe (Charlotte Gainsbourg) recounts a set of erotic adventures that are not as much fun — for her or the audience — as the ones in “Volume I.” Less scandalous than dull and pompous — in effect a long mansplaining of female sexuality — this installment nonetheless delivers a nasty and eminently von Trierian punch line at the very end. (Scott) ‘On My Way’ (No rating, 1:53, in French) This likable, Gallic comedy is a valentine to Catherine Deneuve, who plays a former beauty queen, now in her 60s, who owns a financially failing bistro. When her longtime boyfriend leaves her for another woman, she goes on the road and has a series of mild adventures in the French heartland. (Holden) ★ ‘Particle Fever’ (No rating, 1:39) This documentary, directed by Mark Levinson, chronicles the work of theoretical and experimental physicists involved with the Large Hadron Collider, an enormous gizmo near Geneva that in 2012 isolated the elusive Higgs boson (a subatomic morsel believed to hold the key to understanding the universe). If that sentence is clear to you, you should buy a ticket now, but even if the intricacies of physics lie beyond your grasp, the grandeur of the enterprise and the humanity of the scientists themselves make for mind-blowing viewing. (Scott) ★ ‘Philomena’ (PG-13, 1:38) Judi Dench’s portrayal of a stubborn, kindhearted Irish Catholic trying to discover what became of the son she was forced to give up as a teenager is so quietly moving that it feels lit from within. A major theme of this anticlerical screed is forgiveness. Ms. Dench’s Philomena glows with the radiance of someone serene in her faith despite inhumane treatment by the church. That she makes you believe her character has the capacity to forgive provides the movie with a solid moral center. (Holden) ‘The Raid 2’ (R, 2:28, in Indonesian) The pleasant surprise of Gareth Evans’s sturdy sequel to “The Raid: Redemption” is that neither its undercover drama nor its long running time bog down its bracing, expertly staged fight fests. Iko Uwais returns as Rama, a principled Jakarta cop who infiltrates a crime syndicate by aiding the boss’s son. (Rapold) ‘Rob the Mob’ (R, 1:44) Bright and fleet, Raymond De Felitta’s breezy retelling of one of New York City’s more unusual crime sprees follows a pair of crazy-in-love and comically dumb crooks (Michael Pitt and Nina Arianda) as they rob a series of Mafia social clubs. (Catsoulis) ‘Sabotage’ (R, 1:49) Lovers of camp and cannabis are the most plausible audience for this extravagantly silly movie about a gang of marauding Drug Enforcement Administration undercover thugs led by Arnold Schwarzenegger. Filled with howling, yowling characters who look like they’ve made a close study of the FX show “Sons of Anarchy,” the movie has the kind of jagged, jolting visual excesses and frenzied energy that solicit gasps and guffaws. It’s doubtful that the director, David Ayer, who shares script credit with Skip Woods, intentionally embraced self-parody, but it sure sneaked up on him. (Dargis) ‘10 Rules for Sleeping Around’ (R, 1:34) This awful sex comedy about a couple with a supposedly open marriage who try to convert two friends to that lifestyle has very little sex and very little comedy. And the 10 rules of the title are nothing you couldn’t figure out on your own. (Genzlinger) ‘300: Rise of an Empire’ (R, 1:42) Taking the battle to the sea, this new story about the gory defense of ancient Greece strives to uphold the rah-rah visuals and rhetoric established by its popular predecessor, “300.” A fresh mortal threat to manliness arises in the person of the Persians’ vicious naval commander, Artemisia (Eva Green), but this round of gravity-defying melees and meager intrigue lacks the momentum and bombastic je ne sais quoi of the first film. (Rapold) ‘Tim’s Vermeer’ (PG-13, 1:20) One of the title figures of this documentary directed by Teller and produced by Penn Jillette, is Tim Jenison, a scientist, inventor and restless hobbyist who embarked on a multiyear odyssey to discover whether the movie’s other, better-known, subject, the Dutch master Johannes Vermeer, used any kind of optical tools when he created his extraordinary paintings. Did Vermeer “cheat”? Does it matter? (Dargis) ★ ‘12 Years a Slave’ (R, 2:14) Written by John Ridley and directed by Steve McQueen, “12 Years a Slave” tells the true story of Solomon Northup (Chiwetel Ejiofor), an African-American freeman who, in 1841, was snatched off the streets of Washington, and sold. It’s at once a familiar, utterly strange and deeply American story in which the period trappings long beloved by Hollywood — the paternalistic gentry with their pretty plantations, their genteel manners and all the fiddle-dee-dee rest — are the backdrop for an outrage. Essential viewing. (Dargis) ★ ‘Under the Skin’ (R, 1:48) In this somber Kubrickian sci-fi horror movie, Scarlett Johansson plays a predatory alien who assumes a human identity and lures men to their deaths. Jonathan Glazer’s absorbing movie leaves you reflecting on the notion that every being in the universe is an alien in disguise. (Holden) ★ ‘The Unknown Known’ (PG-13, 1:42) Errol Morris and Donald H. Rumsfeld face off (though only one is seen on camera) in this combative, intellectually thrilling documentary about truth, power and the Iraq War. It’s a disturbing inquiry into recent American political history that plays out as a philosophical skirmish. (Scott) ‘Veronica Mars’ (PG-13, 1:47) For three well-received seasons, Kristen Bell played the title character in “Veronica Mars,” a high-school (then college) sleuth from the fictional, filthy rich town of Neptune. Veronica looked like a SoCal cheerleader and alternately talked like Sam Spade and Noam Chomsky, a combination that made her television’s very own Little Miss Sunshine and Noir. She’s back in this unnecessary footnote to the show, which was canceled in 2007. The showrunner turned movie director Rob Thomas suggests that even after graduating from law school, Veronica yearns for Neptune and its sordid intrigues, but he can’t make the case or his story convincing. (Dargis) ★ ‘Le Week-End’ (R, 1:33) Nick (Jim Broadbent) and Meg (Lindsay Duncan), a left-leaning, academic British baby boomer couple, arrive in Paris to celebrate their 30th anniversary. But are we witnessing the celebration of a long marriage or its sudden unraveling? The writer Hanif Kureishi and the director Roger Michell (whose previous collaborations include “The Mother” and “The Buddha of Suburbia”) confect what is on the surface a bittersweet comedy of love in maturity. But there are strong, angry passions under the surface (particularly as far as Meg is concerned) and an eruption of sharp social satire when Jeff Goldblum shows up playing an old graduate school chum of Nick’s who has matured into a happy and prosperous sellout. (Scott) ‘The Wind Rises’ (No rating, 2:06, in Japanese) Hayao Miyazaki’s newest (and reportedly final) film tells the fictionalized story of Jiro Horikoshi, a gifted aeronautic engineer who is historically notable — or infamous — for designing deadly war planes used by Japan in World War II. Mr. Miyazaki’s elegantly lyrical film chronicles Horikoshi’s process of invention and his poignant romance with his tubercular wife, shadowed by dreamlike premonitions and creative visions. (Rapold) ‘The Wolf of Wall Street’ (R, 3:00) Wildly entertaining and completely appalling, Martin Scorsese’s three-hour bacchanal of drugs, sex and greed zigs and zags across the line between satire and propaganda, propelled by the charm and energy of Leonardo DiCaprio, who plays a crooked stock trader. It’s a vivid document of our times, and an essential artifact for future archaeologists trying to figure out what destroyed our civilization. (Scott) Film Series The Aesthetics of Shadow, Part 2: Europe and America (through Thursday) This cinematic exploration of Daisuke Miyao’s book of the same title, which takes Jun’ichiro Tanizaki’s theory on “the magic of shadows” in Japanese architecture and adapts it to film theory, first looked at how Japanese filmmakers absorbed this aesthetic. As Part 2 makes clear, the influence arrived in the West in the form of brooding, visually austere films that are frequently — and perhaps reductively — described as “noir” or “Expressionist.” Masters of mood like F.W. Murnau and Josef von Sternberg are represented, and the series wisely includes visually innovative cinematographers like Billy Bitzer, known for his discomfitingly visceral work on D.W. Griffith’s “Broken Blossoms,” and William Daniels, who played as central a role as anyone in turning Greta Garbo into a screen legend. Museum of Modern Art, 212-708-9400, moma.org; $12. (Eric Grode) Art of the Real (Friday through April 26) One reason this is considered a golden age for documentaries is because of the increased willingness to expand the form beyond talking-head interviews and vérité footage, resulting in efforts like “Stories We Tell” and “The Act of Killing.” This brand-new series honors what it calls the documentary-as-art movement with more than 30 largely unclassifiable new and old titles, covering everything from Michelangelo Antonioni’s notes on unrealized film projects (“The Makes”) to the 2009 protests in Iran (“The Silent Majority Speaks,” screening on Thursday at 9:15 p.m.). A sidebar devoted to the trailblazing Sensory Ethnography Lab at Harvard will include the stunning “Manakamana” (Saturday at 1:30 p.m.), which uses just 11 shots to dissect the inhabitants of a Nepalese cable car, including a batch of bleating goats. Elinor Bunin Munroe Film Center, Lincoln Center, 144 West 65th Street, 212-875-5601, filmlinc.com; $13. (Grode) ‘I Shot Andy Warhol’ (Monday) Andy Warhol’s Factory was known as a fairly permissive place, but Valerie Solanas — playwright, prostitute, founder of the Society for Cutting Up Men — was a jolt even to its jaded ranks. Mary Harron’s droll 1996 biopic of Solanas, who got her own 15 minutes of fame in 1968 by committing the titular act, features a stellar performance by Lili Taylor and musical re-creations by the likes of Wilco, R.E.M. and a Velvet Underground-esque Yo La Tengo. The prolific playwright and director Madeleine Olnek (“Codependent Lesbian Space Alien Seeks Same” — now there’s a film title Warhol would have appreciated) will introduce it as part of IFC Film Center’s monthly Queer/Art series. At 8 p.m., IFC Center, 323 Avenue of the Americas, at Third Street, Greenwich Village, 212-924-7771, ifccenter.com; $14. (Grode) Panorama Europe (through Sunday) This annual festival of underrecognized European films was called Disappearing Act for its first five years, but now the Museum of the Moving Image and a collection of European cultural institutions have adopted this more optimistic name. A few titles are familiar to New York moviegoers: “Paradise: Love,” the first of Ulrich Seidl’s gimlet-eyed “Paradise” trilogy, and the Spanish police thriller “Unit 7,” which appeared at last year’s Tribeca Film Festival. Among the other titles are several Eastern European offerings, including “Dream Team 1935,” about a Latvian basketball team, and “Blood Type” (screening on Sunday at noon), a documentary about Estonian soldiers fighting in Afghanistan. Museum of the Moving Image, 35th Avenue at 37th Street, Astoria, Queens, 718-784-0077, movingimage.us; $12. (Grode) Tout Truffaut (through Thursday) Film Forum’s tribute to one of the cinema’s greatest auteur bromances continues. Fresh off its Hitchcock retrospective, Film Forum shifts its attention to his admirer and interviewer, François Truffaut. (The more than 26 hours of interviews resulted in the irresistible 1967 book “Hitchcock/Truffaut.”) This series is another bonanza for completists: Nestled alongside classics like “The 400 Blows” and “Jules and Jim” are such lesser-known 1970s titles as his Henry James adaptation, “The Green Room,” and the director’s cut of his Belle Époque love triangle, “Two English Girls” (screening on Friday). 209 West Houston Street, west of Avenue of the Americas, South Village, 212-727-8110, filmforum.org; $13. (Grode) Tribeca Film Festival (Wednesday through April 27) It will be intriguing to see what direction this festival, which quickly became a fixture on the downtown cultural scene, will take now that the Madison Square Garden Corporation has purchased a 50 percent stake in it. For now, the concert-going crowd can bask in documentaries about Nas (the opening-night offering, “Time Is Illmatic,” featuring a live performance afterward), Bjork, James Brown, Alice Cooper and Bob Weir. If you’re on a budget, the screenings on April 25 are free, with Gia Coppola’s “Palo Alto” and the Hurricane Sandy documentary “This Time Next Year” among the 35 offerings that day. The talks and panels will include Aaron Sorkin, Thelma Schoonmaker, Ron Howard and Bryan Cranston. But don’t let the lectures on cinematography and big-data mining intimidate you: The festival still found room for the needs-no-description “Zombeavers.” Various locations, tribecafilm.com; $9 to $30. (Grode) A version of this article appears in print on , on Page C 18 of the New York edition with the headline: The Listings: Movies . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              