   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Sports Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Sports Briefing Tennis Pair Doubles Up on Grand Slam Wins Image Jamie Murray, left, and Bruno Soares defeated Pablo Carreño Busta and Guillermo García-López in the United States Open doubles championship Saturday. Credit Chang W. Lee/The New York Times By  The Associated Press Sept. 10, 2016 Jamie Murray of Britain and Bruno Soares of Brazil won the United States Open doubles title on Saturday for their second Grand Slam title this year, beating Pablo Carreño Busta and Guillermo García-López of Spain, 6-2, 6-3. The fourth-seeded Murray and Soares, who won the Australian Open in January, became the first men’s doubles team to win more than one major title in a season since Bob and Mike Bryan won three in 2013. Murray and Soares dropped only one service game and won 71 percent of first-serve points. SOCCER Celtic Rolls to Win in Old Firm Derby Moussa Dembélé recorded a hat trick as Celtic beat visiting Rangers, 5-1, in the teams’ first Scottish Premier League game in four years. The teams, from Glasgow, have a long history of animosity rooted in religion and politics, but this match did not begin to boil over until late in the second half. Philippe Senderos, who was making his debut for Rangers, was given a second yellow card in the 75th minute for a deliberate hand ball. Eight other yellow cards were also given out. PREMIER LEAGUE Santi Cazorla scored on a stoppage-time penalty kick as host Arsenal beat Southampton, 2-1. Laurent Koscielny had tied the game for Arsenal after an own goal. Roberto Firmino scored twice, and host Liverpool beat Leicester, the defending league champion, by 4-1. LA LIGA Cristiano Ronaldo scored six minutes into his first match since his decisive penalty kick in the Champions League final as Real Madrid beat visiting Osasuna, 5-2, in the Spanish league. BUNDESLIGA A Naby Keita goal with one minute to go gave RB Leipzig a stunning win over visiting Borussia Dortmund, 1-0, in the German league. It was the first Bundesliga victory for Leipzig, a club unpopular with rival fans because of the financial support it receives from Red Bull. MAJOR LEAGUE SOCCER Diego Fagundez had a goal and an assist to help the host New England Revolution beat New York City F.C., 3-1. Frank Lampard scored in the 49th minute for N.Y.C.F.C. (12-9-8) before Fagundez slipped past three defenders and scored in the 58th minute. GOLF Late Surge Provides a Three-Stroke Lead Dustin Johnson ran off four birdies in his last five holes for a four-under-par 68, giving him a three-shot lead over Paul Casey heading into the final round of a soggy BMW Championship in Carmel, Ind. J. B. Holmes, who was four shots behind Johnson, was making a compelling case to be a captain’s pick for the United States’ Ryder Cup team. AUTO RACING Nascar Fills Its Final Three Playoff Spots It was yet another Denny Hamlin runaway in an anticlimactic end to Nascar’s regular season at Richmond International Raceway in Virginia. The final three spots in the 16-driver playoff field went to the rookie Chase Elliott, Austin Dillon and Jamie McMurray. BASEBALL Blue Jays Narrow Gap in the A.L. East J. A. Happ got his 18th win, Melvin Upton Jr. hit a two-run homer, and the visiting Toronto Blue Jays beat Boston, 3-2, moving to a game behind the Red Sox, who lead the American League East. Upton has 25 stolen bases and 20 home runs, reaching the 20-20 mark for the fourth time. NOT PERFECT ENOUGH Because of a lingering blister, Rich Hill was pulled after seven perfect innings in the Los Angeles Dodgers’ 5-0 victory over the visiting Miami Marlins. Hill threw 89 pitches and struck out nine. CYCLING Colombian Closes In on Title in Spain Nairo Quintana of Colombia was poised to win the Vuelta a España after protecting his lead over Chris Froome in a grueling penultimate stage in the mountains. Barring a crash or problem in Sunday’s final stage — a flat 65-mile ride from Las Rozas to Madrid — Quintana will add the Vuelta to the 2014 Giro d’Italia on his Grand Tour list of honors. Quintana held a lead of 1 minute 21 seconds entering the stage and passed Froome late in the ride. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page SP 4 of the New York edition with the headline: A New Pair Doubles Up on Grand Slam Wins . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Related Coverage Dustin Johnson, With 2 Eagles, Sets Course Record Sept. 10, 2016 Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              