   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Television Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by What’s on TV Tuesday By  Kathryn Shattuck Sept. 22, 2015 1:35 P.M. (Starz) THE HOLIDAY (2006) A British wedding columnist (Kate Winslet) swaps places with a Los Angeles movie-trailer producer (Cameron Diaz) after guy troubles leave them in a tizzy in this romantic comedy about love — for men, for the movies — directed by Nancy Meyers. “There is something touching if willfully naïve about Ms. Meyers’s nostalgia for Hollywood’s golden age, when Louis B. Mayer ruled the very lot on which she shot part of this film,” Manohla Dargis wrote in The New York Times. “An old-studio producer would have recognized that there are several films jammed into this one and maybe called in Ben Hecht for a polish, even as he recognized that Ms. Meyers always has something to give.” (Image: Ms. Winslet and Jack Black.) 7 A.M. (Animal Planet) WORLD RHINO DAY Five hours of programming begin with “Battleground: Rhino Wars,” in which four members of the United States Special Operations Forces join an anti-poaching corps in South Africa. “Saving Rhino Phila,” at 10, looks at efforts to help a rhino that was harmed by poachers recover. And “Saving Africa’s Giants With Yao Ming,” at 11, follows this former basketball player to Africa to help spread awareness about the cruelty of poaching. 4 P.M. (Fox News) PAPAL VISIT 2015 President Obama will greet Pope Francis at Andrews Air Force Base. 7 P.M. (FX Movie Channel) KNIGHT AND DAY (2010) A classic car restorer (Cameron Diaz) enroute to Boston for a wedding collides with a C.I.A. superassassin (Tom Cruise) at the airport in Wichita, Kan. A cross-country action-comedy ensues in which Ms. Diaz and Mr. Cruise are “a pair of hastily sketched cartoon characters hurtling from plane crash to car chase to further car, helicopter and motorcycle chases, one involving stampeding bulls,” A. O. Scott wrote in The Times. Still, “it is just possible that ‘Knight and Day’ will earn some admiration because it is not a sequel or a spinoff and employs two stars who refuse to act like or resemble teenagers.” (Image: Ms. Diaz and Mr. Cruise.) 8 P.M. (CBS) NCIS Season 13 finds Gibbs (Mark Harmon) battling to stay alive aboard a Navy hospital ship after being shot. Jon Cryer plays his surgeon, Dr. Cyril Taft. In “NCIS: New Orleans,” at 9, Pride (Scott Bakula) and his team must retrieve a missile stolen during the bombing of a military convoy and prevent an attack on a naval ship. 8 P.M. (13) GORONGOSA PARK: REBIRTH OF PARADISE The filmmaker Bob Poole visits Gorongosa National Park in Mozambique as efforts — led partly by the American philanthropist Greg Carr, the biologist and environmentalist Edward O. Wilson and scientists including the elephant researcher Joyce Poole, Mr. Poole’s sister — are made to restore populations ravaged by a civil war. 8:30 P.M. (ABC) FRESH OFF THE BOAT A second season begins as the Huangs (Randall Park and Constance Wu as the parents, Hudson Yang, Forest Wheeler and Ian Chen as the kids) vacation at a theme park called Gator World. 9 P.M. (Travel) HOTEL IMPOSSIBLE Anthony Melchiorri travels to Cedar City, Utah, where negative reviews have scared people attending the Utah Shakespeare Festival away from the Stratford Court Hotel. 10 P.M. (13) ON TWO FRONTS: LATINOS AND VIETNAM A tale of two siblings — Everett Alvarez, a prisoner of war, and his sister Delia, a protester back home in the United States — frames Mylène Moreno’s examination of the Latino experience during the Vietnam War. 10 P.M. (Fusion) LOSING MY RELIGION? In this special edition of “America With Jorge Ramos,” Mr. Ramos moderates a disucssion with Roman Catholic millennials who are sharply divided over the teachings of the church. What’s Streaming Now HOUSE OF FLYING DAGGERS (2004) In this martial arts film directed by Zhang Yimou, set in the twilight of the Tang dynasty, a blind courtesan (Zhang Ziyi) turns out to belong to a squad of assassins waging an insurgency against the emperor’s decadent government. She is pursued by officials (Takeshi Kaneshiro and Andy Lau) whose loyalties become suspect as their chase evolves into a love triangle. The movie is “a gorgeous entertainment, a feast of blood, passion and silk brocade” but, “for all its fire and beauty, may leave you a bit cold in the end,” A. O. Scott wrote in The Times. ( crackle.com ) Correction :  An earlier version of these highlights misstated the time for “On Two Fronts: Latinos and Vietnam” on Channel 13. It is at 10 p.m., not 9 p.m. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page C 7 of the New York edition with the headline: What’s On TV Tuesday . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              