   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Politics Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Head of I.R.S., Facing Censure, Relishes a Job Few Could Love Image John A. Koskinen, the commissioner of the Internal Revenue Service, testified on May 25 at a House Ways and Means subcommittee’s hearing. Credit Michael Reynolds/European Pressphoto Agency By  Jackie Calmes June 14, 2016 WASHINGTON — By John A. Koskinen’s reckoning, at nearly 77 years of age he might finally have his best job ever: commissioner of the Internal Revenue Service. “If it’s a job where the first thing people say is, ‘Why would you do that?’ then it’s got to be a good job,” he said in an interview. Little could Mr. Koskinen have imagined how “good” the job would get. On Wednesday morning, the House Oversight and Government Reform Committee plans to draft a resolution of censure, accusing Mr. Koskinen of engaging “in a pattern of conduct inconsistent with the trust and confidence placed in him,” urging his “resignation or removal” and requiring forfeiture of his government pension “and any other federal benefits for which he is eligible.” And that, some Republicans say, will just be a prelude to his impeachment . Besides two presidents, no federal executive has been impeached since William W. Belknap, the secretary of war, in 1876. Meantime, though, thank you for your service. “Anybody who’s willing to take on the job of being head of the I.R.S., well, you know, I can only think of one other job with a lower approval rating, and that’s being a member of Congress,” said Representative Mark Meadows of North Carolina, a Republican in the House Freedom Caucus, the conservative faction pushing for impeachment. “So kudos to him for being willing to do that.” Mr. Koskinen became the nation’s top tax collector in December 2013 to steady an agency rattled by political upheaval , the latest in a string of knotty assignments he has gotten from presidents of both parties. Since then, things have not gone so smoothly. Critics say Mr. Koskinen obstructed justice and misled Congress as House Republicans continued their inquiries into allegations that I.R.S. employees discriminated against conservative groups seeking tax-exempt status in 2010 and beyond — scrutiny that began before Mr. Koskinen’s arrival. He has denied the allegations and said his testimony about missing agency emails that turned out to be wrong was based on what he believed to be true at the time. Other investigators — including the Treasury’s inspector general, a Republican, and a bipartisan Senate Finance Committee — criticized Mr. Koskinen’s lapses but found no evidence politics played a role. Censure by the House, because it does not require Senate action, could well be the most severe punishment that Republican critics, goaded by influential Tea Party groups, can exact. If the House votes to impeach Mr. Koskinen, the Senate would not hold a trial and could not muster the necessary two-thirds vote to convict him if it did, Senate Republicans say. However it ends, the turmoil has been a harsh introduction to the broader public for Mr. Koskinen, beyond his narrow world of senior management, and one that belies the reputation he acquired over decades as a go-to first responder for management crises. The genial septuagenarian has long enjoyed a sort of behind-the-scenes prominence, well known to Washington insiders and business leaders. He is also well known to fans of soccer and Duke University — his dual passions — and the soccer stadium there, Koskinen Stadium, is named after him. Mr. Koskinen won the prestigious Elliot L. Richardson Prize this year “for excellence and integrity in government service,” timing that suggested the selection panel’s indifference to the well-publicized complaints of congressional Republicans. “People like that who are sort of turnaround specialists and willing to take on hard jobs, there aren’t that many of them. And people know who they are,” said Alice M. Rivlin, an economist who worked with Mr. Koskinen in the Clinton administration, then in overhauling the government of Washington, D.C., after Congress stripped city officials of their budget power after years of mismanagement. In Mr. Koskinen’s telling, he does not get hired; he is “dragooned” — he used the word more than once during an interview in a spacious, if drab, office with few personal touches besides family photos and mementos from previous jobs. “I never apply for jobs — I just keep getting them,” Mr. Koskinen said. “I say I’m going to go into the witness protection program, and they’ll never find me again.” He has a physics degree from Duke and a law degree from Yale, and held various government jobs from the mid-1960s to early 1970s: clerk to the chief judge of a federal appeals court; adviser to a national commission on urban riots; aide to Mayor John V. Lindsay of New York, a Republican, and then to Senator Abraham A. Ribicoff, Democrat of Connecticut. Next came 21 years in the private sector at the Palmieri Company, where he ultimately became the chief executive and revamped failed entities. Among them were the Penn Central, a Teamsters union pension fund and Mutual Benefit, at the time the largest life insurance company to have failed. Clinton administration recruiters enticed Mr. Koskinen to re-enter government in 1994, first as the deputy for management at the Office of Management and Budget and later as President  Clinton’s so-called Y2K czar in 1998, leading the governmentwide effort to prevent a technological breakdown if computer coding malfunctioned in the transition to the year 2000. When the Y2K job ended without computer chaos, Ms. Rivlin recommended Mr. Koskinen to Washington’s newly elected mayor, Anthony A. Williams. Mr. Koskinen became city administrator and deputy mayor, helping local officials reclaim powers that Congress had transferred to a board of outsiders headed by Ms. Rivlin. “Who in their right mind would want to take on a job like that?” asked Joel L. Fleishman, a longtime friend of Mr. Koskinen’s and a law professor at the Sanford School of Public Policy at Duke. He put that question to Mr. Koskinen then, and again 13 years later when his friend told him about the I.R.S. job offer. “John said, ‘Well, somebody’s got to do it,’” Mr. Fleishman recalled. In September 2008, Mr. Koskinen received an emergency call from the administration of President George W. Bush. As a snowballing financial crisis threatened the global economy, an assistant to the Treasury secretary, Henry M. Paulson Jr., summoned Mr. Koskinen for a new job . The administration then announced the takeover of the nation’s two failing housing-finance giants, Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac — with Mr. Koskinen becoming Freddie Mac’s new chairman. “I don’t know how they even got my cellphone number,” Mr. Koskinen said. For a time, he was also Freddie Mac’s chief executive and chief financial officer. He spent three years rebuilding the entity until he reached 72, the mandatory retirement age. “Freddie needed some stronger management, so we selected him, and he accepted the job,” said James B. Lockhart III, Mr. Bush’s chief housing-finance administrator. “And we were thankful.” At the I.R.S., Mr. Koskinen continues to try to meet even hostile lawmakers in their offices — 115 to date — though several House Republicans chose to come to him, including Mr. Meadows and Representative Peter Roskam, Republican of Illinois and chairman of a subcommittee with jurisdiction over the I.R.S. “The lost opportunity was for someone with his experience to come in, do a clean slate and just start over,” Mr. Roskam said. “But my experience was, he chose to be very defensive of the institution at a time when the institution didn’t deserve defending.” Only after Mr. Koskinen accepted the I.R.S. offer did he learn that four years remained on a five-year term. “I leave Nov. 9 of 2017, but who counts?” he said — implicitly unconcerned about being ousted before then.  Follow The New York Times’s politics and Washington coverage on Facebook and Twitter , and sign up for the First Draft politics newsletter . A version of this article appears in print on , on Page A 17 of the New York edition with the headline: I.R.S. Chief Relishes  a Job Few Could Love . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Related Coverage House to Consider I.R.S. Commissioner’s Impeachment May 23, 2016 Image I.R.S. Commissioner John Koskinen, on Hot Seat, Has History of Bureaucratic Rescue Jobs July 1, 2014 Image I.R.S. Fights Back Against House Republicans’ Attacks April 21, 2016 Image Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              