   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Arts Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Spare Times for Children for June 20-26 By  Laurel Graeber June 19, 2014 ‘Sharks’ Nothing says summer like a huge dorsal fin slicing through azure waters. (Cue the “Jaws” music.) But while this scene usually signals danger and doom in the movies, in real life, it’s a sign of a healthy ocean ecosystem. “We’re debunking the myth that sharks are all bad,” said Adina Williams, senior manager of public programs at the American Museum of Natural History. “Humans are more dangerous to sharks than vice versa.” That’s a message the museum will communicate on Sunday during “Sharks,” part of the Milstein Science Series. Hosted by John Maisey, curator of the division of paleontology, along with the marine biologists Gavin Naylor and Greg Skomal, “Sharks” will investigate these creatures through fossils, presentations, games, a quiz show and a performance of the Beizam (Shark) Dance , an aboriginal ceremony from the Torres Strait Islands. Living sharks may even attend — remotely. The museum plans two Skype sessions with Fabien Cousteau, grandson of the marine explorer Jacques-Yves Cousteau, now on a 31-day research mission on the lab Aquarius, 63 feet underwater off the coast of Florida. “We do hope to see some of the sharks,” Ms. Williams said. “Who better to share shark tales with?” The museum will certainly be filled with small shark impersonators. “We have a game of I’m a Shark, where participants will make shark hats and don them and go through the museum on shark missions,” she said, like spotting various species in the displays. The organization Come Out and Play devised the games, which include Sharkvolution, a chance for children to create their own shark species. They’ll visit different exhibits to “collect” traits: For instance, by choosing a particular marine diet, they’ll earn a sticker for a type of shark mouth; by selecting an environment, they’ll get a sticker for a shark color. The result is a Darwinian mash-up. Who Wants to Be an Elasmobranchologist (Shark Scientist)?, based on the TV show “Who Wants to Be a Millionaire,” will pit teams of audience members against each other in a test of shark knowledge. Along with friends and spectators, “the lifelines will be our experts,” Ms. Williams said. Everyone will learn interesting facts. A sobering example: People kill more than 11,000 sharks an hour . No wonder the one in “Jaws” was mad. (Sunday, 11 a.m. to 4 p.m., Milstein Hall of Ocean Life, Central Park West and 79th Street, 212-769-5100, amnh.org. Free with suggested museum admission: $22; $17 for students and 60+; $12.50 for ages 2 to 12; free for members.) LAUREL GRAEBER For Children ‘Archaeology Zone: Discovering Treasures From Playgrounds to Palaces’ (Friday, Sunday through Tuesday, and Thursday) Children will step into the shoes of an explorer like Indiana Jones in this permanent exhibition at the Jewish Museum, but the adventures will be purely scholarly. Still, there is plenty of excitement in analyzing artifacts like a jar handle, a clay jug and a bangle and figuring out the purpose behind ancient pieces like a Greek helmet and a bull-shaped vessel. This interactive show, for ages 3 to 10, also includes a recreated room from the Ottoman period (about 1900), where young archaeologists can dress in costume. From 11 a.m. to 5:45 p.m.; until 8 p.m. on Thursdays. 1109 Fifth Avenue, at 92nd Street, 212-423-3200, thejewishmuseum.org. Free with admission: $15; $12 for 65+; $7.50 for students; free for under 18 and members; pay what you wish on Thursdays from 5 to 8 p.m. ‘The Ballad of Pondlife McGurk’ (Friday through Sunday) One actor — Andy Manley — incarnates every character from the class bully to the shy misfit in this acutely perceptive and quietly devastating new play from Catherine Wheels Theater Company in Scotland. Having its American premiere at the New Victory Theater, this 50-minute drama, closing this weekend, unfolds with the audience members seated onstage, where they become intimate witnesses to the betrayal of Simon McGurk, an odd but artistic boy, by Martin, a school newcomer whom he’s befriended. The story is told from the perspective of a regretful Martin, and the result, though leavened with redemption, is hard to forget. Friday at 7 p.m.; Saturday at 2 and 7 p.m.; Sunday at noon and 5 p.m., 209 West 42nd Street, Manhattan, 646-223-3010, newvictory.org; $25; $18 for members. ‘Bessie’s Big Shot’ (Friday through Sunday, and Tuesday through Thursday) If a cow can jump over the moon, why can’t she fly on a trapeze? In this production at the Swedish Cottage Marionette Theater, the title character, a cow, longs to join the circus. Based on a show that used to tour on the City Parks Foundation PuppetMobile, this theatrical adventure, by Douglas Strich, Alexander Bartenieff and Bruce Cannon, follows Bessie as she follows her dreams. (Through June 29.) Weekdays, except Mondays, at 10:30 a.m. and noon; Saturdays and Sundays at 1 p.m. At 79th Street and the West Drive, Central Park, 212-988-9093, cityparksfoundation.org. Performances are $10; $7 for under 12. Reservations required. ‘Brooklyn Block Lab’ (Friday through Sunday, and Tuesday through Thursday) You can learn a lot from Brooklyn blocks, and that doesn’t mean just the borough’s streets. The Brooklyn Children’s Museum has opened its “Brooklyn Block Lab,” a new exhibition offering visitors a chance to build and explore with four different kinds of blocks: wooden units; Imagination Playground’s foam blocks; Kapla Planks, a Dutch flat wooden variety; and Magna-Tiles, which are equipped with magnets. And the museum is serious about the space as a lab: Educators will document how the interactions among children there help facilitate language development. (Through Aug. 31) The lab is open daily, except Monday, from 11 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. At 145 Brooklyn Avenue, at St. Marks Avenue, Crown Heights, 718-735-4400, brooklynkids.org. Free with museum admission: $9; free for members and under 1; free to all on Thursdays from 3 to 5 p.m., and every third Thursday from 3 to 7 p.m. Brooklyn Family Day: Barolosolo Cirkus Company (Saturday and Sunday) Don’t be surprised if the ring for this circus looks a lot like a pool. The French troupe Barolosolo Cirkus Company is presenting its comical and musical show “Île O,” which envisions a world where sea levels have grown higher, and everyone sloshes around in ankle-deep water. Part of City Parks Foundation’s SummerStage Kids series, presented by Disney, the entertainment will allow children to get their feet wet, too — metaphorically speaking — with family workshops in circus arts. At 3 and 7 p.m., Pier 1, Brooklyn Bridge Park, 2 Old Fulton Street, at Furman Street, Dumbo, Brooklyn, cityparksfoundation.org/arts/summerstage-kids; free. Children’s Museum of the Arts Free Art Island Outpost (Saturday and Sunday) This island fun doesn’t require a flight to distant shores. The Children’s Museum of the Arts is offering another summer of weekend workshops on Governors Island, exploring a variety of crafts and materials. The theme this season is “Dreamscapes,” with projects in visual arts, theater games and filmmaking, all devoted to fantasy and adventure. From 11 a.m. to 3 p.m., outside Buildings 11 and 14; Nolan Park, Governors Island, 212-274-0986, cmany.org/summer; free. ‘East of the Sun, West of the Moon’ (Saturday) The princess saves the prince in this production from Looking Glass Theater, inspired by the Scandinavian version of “Beauty and the Beast.” Written by Frankie Little Hardin, the play, closing this weekend, concerns a young woman facing a challenge. To save her parents’ lives, she promises to live in a bear’s palace that’s filled with trolls. But all isn’t what it seems. At 11 a.m., Gallery Players, 199 14th Street, Park Slope, Brooklyn, 866-411-8111, lookingglasstheatrenyc.com; $8; $12 for children. Family Fun Day at Bldg 92 (Sunday) The Brooklyn Navy Yard began in 1801 as one of the nation’s first naval shipyards, evolving into a thriving hub of military manufacturing. Today it’s both a historic site and home to many environmentally conscious new businesses. This celebration will include the “Yard Inspector Tour,” a scavenger hunt and yardwide exploration for ages 6 to 13, at 11 a.m. ($10); a tour of Brooklyn Grange, a rooftop farm that will involve children learning about plants and how bees and chickens are raised, at 1 p.m. ($10); a composting workshop, with digging for worms, at 2 p.m. (free); and the “Past, Present & Future Tour,” including family bingo, at 2:30 p.m. ($30; 10 percent discounts for members of Bldg 92 and certain other museums). From 11 a.m. to 4:30 p.m., Bldg 92, Brooklyn Navy Yard Center, 63 Flushing Avenue, at Carlton Avenue, Fort Greene. Information and registration: bldg92.org/events. Film Forum Jr.: ‘Oklahoma!’ (Sunday) The corn will be as high as an elephant’s eye in one corner of Manhattan when Film Forum presents “Oklahoma!,” the 1955 movie version of Rodgers and Hammerstein’s 1943 Broadway musical. Shirley Jones portrays the Oklahoma farm girl Laurie, and Gordon MacRae plays Curley. Their romance unfolds against a backdrop of tensions between farmers and ranchers in this adaptation, part of Film Forum Jr., a series introducing classic cinema to children. (Series runs through June 29.) At 11 a.m., Film Forum, 209 West Houston Street, west of Avenue of the Americas, South Village, 212-727-8110, filmforum.org; $7.50. ‘The Gazillion Bubble Show: The Next Generation’ (Friday through Sunday, and Wednesday) Children love bubbles, and this interactive show promises not just a gazillion but also some of the largest ever blown, along with light effects and lasers. The stars are the members of the Yang family: Fan and Ana Yang and their son Deni and others, who rotate as M.C.’s for the production. Audience members may even find themselves in bubbles of their own. (The run is open-ended.) Friday at 7 p.m.; Saturday at 11 a.m. and 2 and 4:30 p.m.; Sunday at noon and 3 p.m.; Wednesday at 11 a.m. and 2 p.m.; New World Stages, 340 West 50th Street, Clinton, 212-239-6200, gazillionbubbleshow.com; $55 to $75; lap seats for ages 2 and under are $20, cash only, at the box office. ‘The Greatest Pirate Story (N)ever Told!’ (Saturday) How do you describe a show whose script changes with every performance? A few reliable statements: Smooching, sword fighting and water spraying will occur. “Aaarr!” will be heard often. And, most important, it will provide more laughs than there are bones in Davy Jones’s locker. So it goes in this hour long family musical, created by Christopher Leidenfrost, in which a pirate crew is cursed by a sea witch and has to perform a Broadway-style spectacle to get its treasure. Young audience members help write the scenes, in the style of the game Mad Libs. (The run is open-ended.) Saturdays at 11 a.m., Snapple Theater Center, 210 West 50th Street, Manhattan, 212-921-7862, greatestpiratestory.com; $39 to $99. (The $39 tickets are available only by calling or visiting the box office.) ‘The Greek Monsters’ (Friday through Thursday) Construction crews aren’t all that have invaded the Onassis Cultural Center NY during its renovation; a host of mythological monsters has moved in, too. The center asked Beetroot, a Grecian design group, to install this exhibition of sculptures, bas-reliefs and paintings in the Olympic Tower atrium while work was going on. Children can meet characters like the Cyclops, Medusa, the Minotaur and Cerberus (the three-headed dog that guarded the underworld) and play a wall game using magnetic puzzle pieces. The weekends also feature Sundays at Onassis, a free program from 10:30 to 11:30 a.m. in which visitors ages 3 through 7 will explore the show, learn about the mythology, try out some monster movement and make a related art project to take home. (Through July 31.) Daily from 10 a.m. to 8 p.m., 645 Fifth Avenue, at 51st Street, onassisusa.org; free, but reservations are required for the Sunday program via email to guidedtoursOCC@onassisusa.org, with the subject line stating “Sundays at Onassis.” ‘Jazzed! The Changing Beat of 125th Street’ (Friday through Sunday, and Tuesday through Thursday) Young visitors may want to put on their dancing shoes before they visit this new show at the Children’s Museum of Manhattan. Then again, on certain days they can just wait and make a pair there. Presented in conjunction with the National Jazz Museum in Harlem, this exhibition revisits the Harlem Renaissance with displays dedicated to major jazz figures, highlighting Ella Fitzgerald, Bill (Bojangles) Robinson and Duke Ellington. Activities include song, dance, investigations of musical composition and craft workshops that include, yes, building your own tap shoes. Performances will be a regular part of the show. (Through Dec. 31.) From 10 a.m. to 5 p.m.; until 7 p.m. on Saturdays; open until 8 p.m. the first Friday of every month; Tisch Building, 212 West 83rd Street, 212-721-1223, cmom.org. Free with admission: $11; $7 for 65+; free for members and under 1. Kids Cruise (Saturday) The best cruises are like the one in Maurice Sendak’s “Where the Wild Things Are,” in which young adventurers can have a great rumpus and still be safely home for dinner. That’s what Circle Line offers in its series of children’s sails. Each trip consists of a 75-minute voyage to the Statue of Liberty (with a chance to take a photo there), as well as entertainment. This trip includes a Radio Disney Dance Party. Boarding at 9:30 a.m.; sailing at 10 a.m.; Pier 83, West 42nd Street and 12th Avenue, Clinton, 212-563-3200, circleline42.com; $28; $20 for ages 3 to 12; free for 2 and under. Kids in the Square (Thursday) That’s Union Square Park in Manhattan, which has more than playgrounds and lush grass to lure children this summer. Every Thursday through Aug. 7, the square will offer family activities and free entertainment, starting at 10 a.m. with Yoga Story Time from the yoga studio Karma Kids in the Pavilion, on the South Lawn. At 11 a.m., the schedule always includes a concert or show on the South Plaza. This week the performer is Rolie Polie Guacamole, who, perhaps not surprisingly, offers songs about acai berries and hummus, but touches on plenty of nonfood subjects, too. East 14th to East 17th Streets, Broadway to Fourth Avenue, unionsquarenyc.org; free. ‘The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe’ (Saturday) If the children of the Pevensie family could travel to the magical land of Narnia through something as simple as a wardrobe, why shouldn’t two hard-working actors be able to play them and all the characters found there? That’s what Abigail Taylor-Sansom and her husband, Rockford Sansom, who recently joined the cast, are attempting in the Off Broadway Family Theater’s first production, le Clanché du Rand’s adaptation of C. S. Lewis’s classic novel. (The run is open-ended.) Saturdays at 11 a.m., St. Luke’s Theater, 308 West 46th Street, Clinton, 212-239-6200, narniaoffbroadway.com; $35. Mad. Sq. Kids (Tuesday and Thursday) The kids attending won’t have to worry about being mad or square: The entertainment is fun and hip in this summer series of hourlong concerts in Madison Square Park. The events continue on Tuesday with Joanie Leeds and the Nightlights, who will definitely not put little listeners to sleep as they celebrate their new album, “Good Egg.” On Thursday Lucky Diaz and the Family Jam Band, the only Americans ever to win a Latin Grammy for best children’s album, will perform. At 10:30 a.m., Oval Lawn, 23rd Street between Madison and Fifth Avenues, madisonsquarepark.org; free. MoMA Art Lab: Movement (Friday through Thursday) It’s easy to think of art as monumental and fixed, but many creative works move, or at least appear to. This interactive space for children at the Museum of Modern Art is devoted to the idea of motion, whether it’s in a mobile, a moving picture, a performance or the artist’s hand applying paint. Activities in the lab relate to different works in the museum’s collection: Preschoolers can build structures incorporating movement; older children can try their hands at stop-motion animation. Related programs include drawing or art-making sessions for ages 5 and older on Fridays at 4:30 p.m., and story time followed by related art projects for ages 2 and older on Tuesdays at 11 a.m. (Through Aug. 31.) Daily from 10:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m.; to 6:30 p.m. on Fridays; Lewis B. and Dorothy Cullman Education and Research Building, 4 West 54th Street, Manhattan, 212-708-9400, moma.org/artlab. Free with museum admission: $25; $18 for 65+; $14 for students; free for ages 16 and under. ‘Monday Night Magic’ (Monday) This show bills itself as the longest-running Off Broadway entertainment of its kind. (It opened in 1997.) Every Monday a different group of magicians appears (or disappears, as the case may be), offering illusions, sleight of hand and an occasional thrill like knife throwing. The performers planned for this week are Carl Mercurio, Jeff Grow and Devlin. At 8 p.m., Players Theater, 115 Macdougal Street, at Minetta Lane, Greenwich Village, 800-551-4767, hollywoodpop.com/mondaynightmagic; $66.50 to $72.50; $10 discounts available on phone orders with the codes HPG-Prem or HPG-VIP. ‘My Superhero, Roberto Clemente’ (Saturday) Roberto Clemente (1934-72) may not have had superpowers, but he was certainly a hero, both on and off the baseball field. Battling discrimination throughout his sports career, he became the first Latino athlete inducted into the Baseball Hall of Fame, and died while trying to help others: he was killed in the crash of a plane he had chartered to deliver aid to earthquake victims in Nicaragua. This new bilingual children’s musical from Teatro SEA, written by Manuel Antonio Morán and Alejandro Zuleta, and closing on Saturday, focuses on a boy named Bobby, who, with his friends, discovers Clemente’s legacy. At 3 p.m., Los Kabayitos Puppet and Children’s Theater, Clemente Soto Vélez Cultural Center, 107 Suffolk Street, at Rivington Street, Lower East Side, 212-529-1545, teatrosea.org; $18; $15 for children; free for those who dress up as superheroes or members of their favorite baseball team. ‘Mysteries of the Unseen World’ (Friday through Thursday) Eyelash mites, bacteria, lice: You may feel that some subjects in “Mysteries of the Unseen World,” the new Imax film at the American Museum of Natural History, are actually best unseen. But that would be a shame. Although this movie, the first at the museum in digital 3-D, has disquieting moments, it also offers dazzling ones, showing organisms and processes that are too small, too fast, too slow or just plain invisible to the human eye. These include flowers blooming, water drops bouncing and dragonflies’ four wings moving in different directions simultaneously. (Through July 6.) Hourly, from 10:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m., with the 3-D screenings at 10:30 a.m. and 12:30, 1:30, 2:30 and 4:30 p.m. (Other showings are 2-D.) Central Park West and 79th Street, 212-769-5200, amnh.org. Included in Museum Plus One admission (general admission and one Imax film or special exhibition): $27; $22 for students and 60+; $16 for ages 2 to 12. Member tickets: $13.50; $8.50 for children. North River Historic Ship Festival (Friday through Sunday) Families can sail into the past at this annual celebration, which brings several restored ships to Pier 25 in TriBeCa: the schooner Pioneer, built in 1885; the Pegasus, a 1907 tugboat; the Lilac, a 1933 former Coast Guard lighthouse tender; the John J. Harvey, a retired 1931 fireboat; and the Lehigh Valley Barge No. 79, built in 1914. Families can tour some of the ships on Friday from 5 to 8 p.m. and Saturday from noon to 5 p.m.; take free sailing trips on the Hudson River on Saturday only from noon to 5 p.m.; and enjoy touch-tank explorations, knot tying and science activities involving river wildlife on board the Lilac on Sunday from 1 to 5 p.m. On Sunday the barge, a k a the Waterfront Museum & Showboat Barge, will stage “DeadPan Alley,” a show of magic, circus arts and vaudevillian comedy by Will Shaw at 1 and 4 p.m. Pier 25, Hudson River Park, North Moore Street and the Hudson River, TriBeCa, nrhss.org; free, except for the “DeadPan Alley” performances: in advance, $13; $10 for children. At the door: $15 and $12. ‘Peace, Love, and Cupcakes: The Musical’ (Saturday and Sunday) Vital Theater Company’s latest children’s musical, revived but at a new theater, takes place on one of the most treacherous, complicated and unrelenting battlefields to which America has sent its young: middle school. An attempt to attract audiences as old as 12, the show draws on the first novel in a series by Sheryl Berk and her young daughter, Carrie Berk. Though not always plausible, the production, written by Rick Hip-Flores, offers a brisk, entertaining and well-acted hour as it explores what happens to the misfit heroine, Kylie Carson, when she starts a cupcake club that threatens to become even more popular than the reigning mean girl at school. (Through Aug. 31.) Saturdays and Sundays at 4 p.m., Marjorie S. Deane Little Theater, 10 West 64th Street, Manhattan, 212-579-0528, vitaltheatre.org; $30; $40 for premium seats; $20 when bought online before Saturday with the code VTCPLCMD20. Pier Kids: The Puppetmobile (Sunday) Pier 6 in Brooklyn Bridge Park will become a puppet theater this weekend when the City Parks Foundation presents “Little Red’s Hood,” a hip, urban version of “Little Red Riding Hood” performed by the Swedish Cottage Marionette Theater. It’s part of Pier Kids, a new family entertainment series that also includes art making. (Series runs through Aug. 3.) At 11 a.m. (art activities start at noon), Atlantic Avenue and Furman Street, Brooklyn Heights, brooklynbridgepark.org/events; free. ‘Pinkalicious, the Musical’ (Saturday and Sunday) That rosy little girl is back. This long-running production of Elizabeth and Victoria Kann’s adaptation of their children’s book, from Vital Theater Company, is now at the Majorie S. Deane Little Theater. The pink-obsessed title character finds out that sometimes being in the pink can be too much of a good thing — especially when eating too many pink cupcakes has turned her pink from head to toe. John Gregor wrote the score and some of the lyrics. (Through Aug. 31.) Saturdays and Sundays at 1 p.m., 10 West 64th Street, Manhattan, 212-579-0528, vitaltheatre.org; $30; $40 for premium seats. Puppetworks (Saturday and Sunday) Animals of all kinds are frolicking onstage — with musical accompaniment — in the latest show from Puppetworks, whose artistic director, Nicolas Coppola, has adapted three famous tales for his marionette theater: “Peter & the Wolf,” with Prokofiev’s score; “The Frog Prince,” with music from Kabalevsky’s “The Comedians”; and “The Ugly Duckling,” which features shadow puppets. All three are being performed in just an hour. (Through Aug. 17.) Weekends at 12:30 and 2:30 p.m., 338 Sixth Avenue, at Fourth Street, Park Slope, Brooklyn, 718-965-3391, puppetworks.org; $9; $8 for children. Reservations are recommended. ‘Ruby Bridges’ (Sunday) The title character of this film was only 6 when she crossed a threshold and changed history. In 1960 Ruby Bridges of New Orleans was the first child to integrate an all-white elementary school in the South, which she entered amid angry crowds and accompanied by federal marshals. The Brooklyn Museum, in conjunction with its exhibition “Witness: Art and Civil Rights in the Sixties,” is screening this 1998 made-for-television movie of Ruby’s story, which will be followed by a tour of the show and a family art activity in which children will make a political button. At 2 p.m., 200 Eastern Parkway, at Prospect Park, Brooklyn, 718-638-5000, brooklynmuseum.org. Free with suggested admission; $12; $8 for students and 62+; free for members and under 12. Stories at the Statue of Hans Christian Andersen (Saturday) Not everything that blooms perennially in Central Park is a flower or a tree. Storytelling also returns there each summer, as the city’s Parks and Recreation Department, the Central Park Conservancy and the Hans Christian Andersen Storytelling Center bring narrative performers to Andersen’s statue every Saturday. The series, for ages 6 and older, continues this Saturday with a variety of tellers and tales, including Andersen’s “A Drop of Water” and a story from Gambia. At 11 a.m., inside the park at 72nd Street and Fifth Avenue, rain or shine, hcastorycenter.org; free. Sunset Eco-Cruises to the Harbor Heron Islands (Sunday) Herons, egrets and ibises are New Yorkers too, and about 3,000 reside on the islands around the city harbor. This series of cruises from New York City Audubon visits the birds’ lairs and provides binoculars for close-up viewing. Gabriel Willow, a naturalist and storyteller, narrates the adventures, conducted via New York Water Taxi. This weekend’s trip, to the Brother Islands, promises close-up views of egret colonies. From 7 to 9 p.m., Pier 17, South Street Seaport, Fulton and South Streets, Lower Manhattan, 212-742-1969, nywatertaxi.com/tours/audubon; $40; $30 for ages 3 through 12; free for under 3. ‘A Voyage Through Jewish History’ (Sunday through Thursday) This journey involves not just miles, but years. In this new permanent interactive exhibition at the Jewish Children’s Museum, young visitors can travel from Abraham and Sarah’s tent to the Western Wall in contemporary Jerusalem and beyond. Activities along the way include giving water to Rebecca’s camels, playing the strings on David’s harp (a high-tech version with beams of light that emit sounds when struck) and taking part in the exodus from Egypt. Usual museum hours are Mondays through Thursdays, 10 a.m. to 4 p.m.; until 5:30 p.m. on Sundays; 792 Eastern Parkway, at Kingston Avenue, Crown Heights, Brooklyn, 718-907-8833, jcm.museum; $13; $10 for 65+; free for under 2. Youth Mini Soccer Festival (Saturday) It may not be the World Cup, but there’s a lot of fun to be had this weekend on Randalls Island for children who like to play soccer. Randalls Island Park Alliance, along with the organization Summerfuel and Arsenal Football Club, is presenting this celebration for ages 5 through 14. Drawing on the training offered by the Arsenal Soccer Schools in England, the event will include games, demonstrations and coaching for all skill levels. At 9 a.m. (ages 5 through 8), 10 a.m. (ages 8 through 11) and 11 a.m. (ages 11 through 14), Field 80, Randalls Island Park, reachable via the pedestrian footbridge at 103rd Street and the East River, East Harlem, 212-796-8342, randallsisland.org/news-events; free. LAUREL GRAEBER A version of this article appears in print on , on Page C 30 of the New York edition with the headline: Spare Times: For Children . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              