   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Hockey Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Hockey World Cup, Seeking Legitimacy, Scrambles Teams and Settles in Toronto Image Marcus Kruger of Team Sweden during practice on Thursday at the World Cup of Hockey in Toronto. Credit Minas Panagiotakis/Getty Images By  Curtis Rush Sept. 15, 2016 TORONTO — The World Cup of Hockey, concocted in the N.H.L.’s marketing lab and repackaged for a new generation of fans, will take another shot at trying to get the formula right over the next two weeks. Canada prevailed in the last World Cup, in 2004. On Saturday, after a 12-year hiatus, the tournament will return at the Air Canada Centre, where more than 180 international players on eight teams will take to the ice. Rangers goaltender Henrik Lundqvist was the third goalie for Sweden in 2004 and did not see any game action. “A lot for me was learning and seeing the big guys, how they played the game and how they practiced,” Lundqvist, now 34, said. “It was fun to be around.” It has been 20 years since the inaugural event, in which the United States upset Canada in the final. This summer, Patrick Kane, the N.H.L.’s most valuable player and the league’s scoring champion for the Chicago Blackhawks last season, watched a replay of that 1996 victory to get a sense of what to expect. “I was amazed at how intense the game was,” Kane said. “Now I know how important the World Cup of Hockey is. You had guys fighting after the whistle, a lot of chippiness, guys slashing each other.” But this joint venture between the N.H.L. and the N.H.L. Players’ Association has been criticized as a cash grab that lacks the authenticity of World Cups in other sports. The last World Cup included teams from Canada, the United States, Russia, Sweden, Finland, the Czech Republic, Germany and Slovakia. But instead of allowing Germany and Slovakia back in for this tournament, the N.H.L. created Team North America and Team Europe in hopes of raising the level of competition. Team Europe comprises players from countries other than the Czech Republic, Finland, Russia and Sweden. Team North America, known as the Young Guns, is a roster of 23-and-under emerging stars from Canada and the United States. It includes the No. 1 picks of the last two drafts: Connor McDavid of the Edmonton Oilers and Auston Matthews of the Toronto Maple Leafs. While the top young American and Canadian players are on one team, the rivalry between the veteran teams from the United States and Canada is likely to be a focal point for the tournament. The United States’ last big moment on the international stage came at the Vancouver Olympics in 2010, when the Americans reached the final only to come away with silver when Sidney Crosby scored the overtime winner for Canada. The United States did not medal at the 2014 Olympics, while Canada won its third gold in the past four Olympics. This World Cup gives the Americans another chance to upend their fierce rivals — and to do so on Canadian soil. “We’re excited about the opportunity,” Kane said. “I think for a lot of us, we let a couple of opportunities slip away, whether it was 2010 or 2014 in the Olympics.” The United States, under Coach John Tortorella, will try to counter Canada’s talent with a physical, grinding squad. The countries split two pretournament games. San Jose Sharks forward Joe Pavelski said he liked Tortorella’s intensity. “He has a passion for the game; he just wants you to be at your best,” Pavelski said. “I think everyone can definitely feed off his enthusiasm and passion for the game.” The United States and Canada, both in Group A, play each other on Tuesday night. They are joined in Group A by the Czech Republic and Team Europe. Group B consists of Finland, Sweden, Russia and Team North America. After three preliminary-round games, the two top finishers in each group will advance to the semifinals. The best-of-three final series is scheduled to begin Sept. 27. Game 3, if necessary, would be Oct. 1. Much is at stake for the N.H.L. If all goes well, it may decide to hold future World Cups every four years as an alternative to the Olympics. The league’s participation in the 2018 Games in South Korea is uncertain, even though many players said Thursday that they wanted to keep going to the Olympics. It did not help to sell this tournament when several marquee names, including Canada’s Jamie Benn and Sweden’s Henrik Zetterberg, had to pull out at the last minute because of injuries. Previous World Cups had challenges related to timing, location and circumstance, but holding all the games in hockey-loving Toronto may overcome some of those hurdles. “You can sense the atmosphere and sense how big it’s going to be,” the Finnish goaltender Pekka Rinne said. In 1996, the games were spread over three Canadian cities, along with Philadelphia and New York. There was little buzz in the United States, despite rosters studded with stars like Mark Messier, Wayne Gretzky and Brian Leetch. The event struggled to compete with the United States Open, the start of the N.F.L. season and baseball’s stretch run. In the 2004 World Cup, a looming N.H.L. lockout stripped away the energy of Canada beating Finland in the one-game final. The entire 2004-5 N.H.L. season ended up being canceled. The competition from football and baseball remains, but this tournament also represents the return of ESPN to professional hockey broadcasting for the first time since 2004. This World Cup may already have too many gimmicks for some tastes, and an increase in credibility is unlikely to happen overnight. “It’s a brand that’s being built, but now they need to nurture it,” said Peter Widdis, a sports marketing professor at George Brown College in Toronto. “When you order a Starbucks coffee for $4, you know what you are getting,” he said. “They might change a couple of flavors. But you walk into Starbucks for consistency. They need to do that with this brand experience four years from now.” A version of this article appears in print on , on Page B 13 of the New York edition with the headline: World Cup Returns, With Teams Reshuffled . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Related Coverage World Cup of Hockey Rosters March 2, 2016 Image For Some N.H.L. Players, a Welcome Shot at Olympic Qualifying Aug. 31, 2016 Image Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              