   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Americas Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Open Source Chilean Miners Recruited to Inspire World Cup Squad By  Robert Mackey May 30, 2014 Even for a collection of unusually talented soccer stars, the task facing Chile’s national team at next month’s World Cup is daunting: playing the two finalists from the last tournament, Spain and the Netherlands. Since Chile finds itself in what some fans call “ the group of death ,” in which only two of the four teams — Australia is the other contender in Group B — can advance to the second round, two nations are sure to be cast into mourning. Given the scope of the challenge, the Bank of Chile recruited a group of national heroes to provide inspiration to the squad, the 33 miners who survived for more than two months in a collapsed mine shaft deep under the Atacama Desert in 2010. The miners star in a rousing television commercial released this week by the bank, in which their leader, Mario Sepúlveda , stands with his comrades above the ruined San José mine that nearly became their tomb and insists that, “for a Chilean, nothing, nothing is impossible.” As the inspirational speech builds to a crescendo, Mr. Sepúlveda shouts: “Spain is tough? The Netherlands is tough? We don’t fear the ‘group of death’! We don’t care about death! Because we defeated death before!” Should Chile find some way to knock out one of the two giants of international soccer in the first round, the reward could be an even more intimidating second-round matchup with the host nation, Brazil. Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              