   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Briefing Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Europe Edition Russia, Kim Jong-un, PewDiePie: Your Wednesday Briefing By  Patrick Boehler Feb. 14, 2017 Good morning. Here’s what you need to know: Image Credit Al Drago/The New York Times •  Intercepted calls show that members of the Trump campaign had repeated contact with Russian intelligence before the election, current and former officials said . The resignation of Michael T. Flynn, President Trump’s national security adviser , over his conversations with the Russian ambassador has added to the impression that the U.S. security apparatus is, as a top Republican put it, “ dysfunctional .” If Mr. Flynn was not entirely honest with the F.B.I. , it could expose him to a felony charge. Mr. Trump had known for weeks, his spokesman said, that Mr. Flynn had misled the vice president about the conversations . A retired vice admiral who is currently a Lockheed Martin executive is the president’s top choice to replace Mr. Flynn . _____ Image Credit Pool photo by Alexander Zemlianichenko • The Kremlin  secretly deployed a new cruise missile that American officials say violates a landmark arms control treaty, posing a major test for Mr. Trump as his administration is facing a crisis over its ties to Moscow. Jim Mattis, the U.S. defense secretary, is scheduled to meet with his NATO colleagues in Brussels today. Russia is watching mixed signals from the White House with growing apprehension . _____ Image Credit Pool photo by Dan Balilt • The upheaval at the White House  complicates a visit today by Israel’s prime minister, Benjamin Netanyahu. He and Mr. Trump are likely to discuss an “outside-in” approach to the Palestinian conflict: collaborating with Arab countries worried about Iran, and using those relationships to put pressure on the Palestinians. Such an approach has failed before. Today’s episode of our podcast, The Daily, considers the prospects now. Listen here if you’re on a computer, here if you have an iOS device or here for an Android device. (Just in case you are tired of politics, we’ve put together a collection of stories on ticket scalpers, subway romances and ice fishers that have absolutely nothing to do with politics .) _____ Image Credit Dimitar Dilkoff/Agence France-Presse — Getty Images • In parts of the city of Mosul, Iraq’s fight against the Islamic State never ended. “Everyone’s afraid — there’s fighting day and night. And when the drones come, everyone disappears,” a butcher said . _____ Image Credit Ahn Young-Joon/Associated Press • The police in Malaysia are searching for two women in the assassination of the half brother of the North Korean leader Kim Jong-un in Kuala Lumpur. South Korea’s governing party called the apparent murder a “naked example of Kim Jong-un’s reign of terror.” _____ Business Image Credit Ralph Orlowski/Reuters • The French carmaker PSA , which already owns the brands Peugeot and Citroën, is in talks to acquire General Motors’ European brands Opel and Vauxhall . A deal would create Europe’s second-largest carmaker after Volkswagen. • The European Parliament will vote today on the E.U.’s far-reaching trade pact with Canada . • Janet L. Yellen , the Federal Reserve chief, told a Senate committee that U.S. job growth remained good and that increases in the key interest rate were still likely. • The unsettling assertion that immigration can erode productivity has returned to academic circles, our economic columnist writes . • Here’s a snapshot of global markets . In the News Image Credit Sean Gallup/Getty Images • The re-election of Chancellor Angela Merkel of Germany in September is looking increasingly less certain. [ Der Spiegel ] • The E.U. sent Pierre Moscovici, the economic commissioner, to Greece for talks today with Prime Minister Alexis Tsipras to unblock bailout negotiations. [ Kathimerini ] • Serbia’s governing party backed Prime Minister Aleksandar Vucic, a former ultranationalist turned pro-E.U. reformer, as its candidate for the presidency. [ Reuters ] • President Trump spoke by phone with President Muhammadu Buhari of Nigeria, whose countrymen have not heard from him in weeks. [ The New York Times ] • From Peru to Venezuela , a corruption scandal over a Brazilian construction company is shaking Latin America’s political establishment. [ The New York Times ] • Disney and YouTube severed ties with Felix Kjellberg, a Swede better known as PewDiePie who is YouTube’s most popular star, over videos featuring anti-Semitic imagery. [ The New York Times ] • We started a twice-monthly email focusing on the news, ideas and events that matter to the United Kingdom. You can sign up for the U.K. Digest here . Smarter Living Image Credit Alex Cretey-Systermans for The New York Times • A scientific  approach to your morning coffee: Try freezing your beans for a tastier brew. • After a woman swipes right on a man with his own bakery, she falls for both him and his bread . •  Recipe of the day: Move on from weeknight chicken and try stuffed and seared duck breasts . Noteworthy Video Attend the Westminster Kennel Club Dog Show, which has been held annually in New York City since 1877. More than 2,800 dogs compete over three days and are judged on agility, obedience and conformation. Published On Feb. 14, 2017 Credit Image by Todd Heisler/The New York Times. Technology by Samsung. • Our latest 360 video takes you backstage at the 141st Westminster Kennel Club Dog Show in New York City . A German shepherd named Rumor won Best in Show . • South Korea is a skiing afterthought no more. The 2018 Winter Olympics is a major source of pride for the country as a winter sports wonderland. • In the Champions League , Paris St.-Germain battered Barcelona in a 4-0 blowout. • Our Rome bureau chief  compares Pope Francis with Jude Law’s fictional pontiff in the HBO series “The Young Pope.” The TV version paled in contrast. • A Brooklyn couple , who became teenage sweethearts 75 years ago in a ghetto in Nazi-occupied Poland, recount how their love helped them survive the Holocaust. “He’s not very romantic,” she says, but he saved her life . Back Story Image Credit Associated Press As unlikely as it may sound today, Canada’s Maple Leaf flag was once the center of a dispute so bitter that historians named it: the Great Flag Debate . When the Maple Leaf, or l’Unifolié (French for “the One-Leafed”), was officially adopted on this day in 1965, it was after decades of disagreement that had divided the public, mostly along lines of British and French colonial roots. The country had flown a flag featuring the Union Jack, under which Canadian troops fought in two world wars. Prime Minister Lester B. Pearson, though, wanted a banner that would unify Canadians, not just represent those with British ties. And a 1958 poll showed that more than 80 percent of the population wanted a flag entirely different from any other country’s. Tree references show up in other flags. Think of Lebanon’s cedar tree, or the popular use of the olive branch, as in the United Nations’ logo. Canada’s maple leaf was carefully designed. Its 11 points were decided on after a wind tunnel test to see how the leaf would look flapping in the breeze . Charles McDermid contributed reporting. _____ Your Morning Briefing is published weekday mornings. Read the latest edition of the U.S. briefing here and the latest for Asia and Australia here . What would you like to see here? Contact us at europebriefing@nytimes.com . Correction :  Because of an editing error, an earlier version of this article misidentified the brands owned by the French carmaker PSA. It owns Citroën and Peugeot, not Renault. Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              