   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Sports Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Sports Briefing Indians Pound Out 15 Runs on 19 Hits to Rally Past Reds May 17, 2016 Yan Gomes hit a three-run homer in the sixth inning and had four R.B.I., and the Indians rallied from an early four-run deficit to beat the Cincinnati Reds, 15-6, on Monday night in Cleveland. Marlon Byrd hit a two-run homer in a five-run sixth, and the Indians erased a 4-0 deficit while recording season highs in runs and hits. Cincinnati scored four times in the first three innings, but Cleveland tied it with a four-run third and added three in the fourth. Francisco Lindor, who was 3 for 5, Jason Kipnis and Mike Napoli each had two R.B.I. for the Indians, who had 19 hits. Kipnis’s two-run single broke a 4-4 tie and helped the Indians take a three-run lead in the fourth. The Reds cut the lead to one in the fifth, but Gomes, homering for the third straight game, and Byrd, who had three hits, unloaded off Layne Somsen. “We needed that,” Gomes said of the offensive eruption. “We had a nice little back and forth, and to extend the lead calmed us down a little bit.” Around the Majors Nick Castellanos hit a tiebreaking homer in the seventh inning as the host Detroit Tigers avoided a humiliating loss, beating the Minnesota Twins, 10-8. The Tigers led by 8-0 after one inning with Jordan Zimmermann on the mound, only to see the Twins come back to tie the game in the seventh. Detroit Manager Brad Ausmus was ejected in the middle of the rally for arguing a called third strike. Curt Casali hit a three-run homer, and Tim Beckham and Steve Pearce each hit two-run blasts as the visiting Tampa Bay Rays beat the Toronto Blue Jays, 13-2. Blue Jays Manager John Gibbons was ejected for arguing a called third strike in the fourth. It was the third ejection of the season for Gibbons and his second in two games — his was one of eight ejections in a game Sunday against Texas that included Rougned Odor’s punch to the jaw of Jose Bautista. Toronto has lost three straight. GOLF Painful Swings Aside, Woods Says His Game Is ‘Progressing Nicely’ Tiger Woods grimaced as he took three warm-up swings after sitting in a chair for 30 minutes while talking about his coming tournament at Congressional Country Club in Bethesda, Md. Hitting a ceremonial shot from a forward tee on the par-3 10th hole on a cool, blustery morning, he chunked his first attempt into the pond short of the green. He asked for another ball. That one splashed into the water, too. With officials from his foundation egging him on, he tried one more time. The last one cleared the pond, but not by enough. It landed on a steep bank and rolled down into the water. His efforts at Congressional — home to the Quicken Loans National, an event he hosts that benefits his foundation — put to rest most of the lingering questions about whether he would be ready to return to competitive golf anytime soon. “I have been practicing at home, and I’m progressing nicely,” Woods said. “I’m hoping to play. That’s the overriding question I keep hearing: ‘When are you coming back? When are you playing?’ I get it all the time. If I knew, I’d tell you, because it’d be fun to know.” The tournament at Congressional will be played June 23 to 26, the week after the United States Open, and it certainly appears that Woods will attend only in a noncompetitive role. PRO BASKETBALL Pacers Promote McMillan to Coach Larry Bird found the Indiana Pacers’ new voice on his own bench. Now Nate McMillan must show that his old-school style still resonates with today’s young players. Bird promoted McMillan, 51, to head coach, hoping he will change the culture inside the locker room. The decision ends the search for Frank Vogel’s replacement after less than two weeks. “We will respect the game,” McMillan said during a news conference. “What I mean by respect the game is that you mentally and physically have to prepare yourself to go out and play hard every single night.” The Pacers’ effort, or lack of it, was a constant source of frustration inside and outside Bankers Life Fieldhouse. And although McMillan sat on the same bench, as Vogel’s top assistant the past three seasons, Bird found enough distinction in McMillan’s personality, style and background to make the change. “I like what he did in Portland; I like the fact that he’s old-school; I like structure,” said Bird, the Pacers’ president for basketball operations. “I’m not saying Frank didn’t have those things, but I’ve always admired Nate from afar, and that’s why it didn’t take me long to decide to bring him in here.” Timberwolves’ Towns Named Top Rookie Karl-Anthony Towns became a unanimous winner of the N.B.A. Rookie of the Year Award, giving the Minnesota Timberwolves consecutive winners, after Andrew Wiggins last season. “This is such a landmark in my career,” Towns said, “but it’s not the last one.” The Knicks’ Kristaps Porzingis finished second, and Denver’s Nikola Jokic was third. HOCKEY Canada, on a Roll, Defeats France Canada rolled to its sixth successive win of the world ice hockey championship in beating France, 4-0, in St. Petersburg, Russia. Canada, still perfect, leads Group B. The group finale on Tuesday against Finland, which is also perfect, will determine the top seed for the quarterfinals. Mark Stone, a wing, finished with a goal and an assist as Canada posted its lowest goal total of the tournament. Canada had scored at least five goals in each previous game. Goaltender Calvin Pickard made 13 saves as the team picked up its third shutout. France stayed in the game thanks to a strong performance from goaltender Ronan Quemener, who made 42 saves. Russia continued its strong form with a 3-0 win over Norway in Moscow to move to second in Group A. Russia plays Sweden on Tuesday with second place at stake. The Russians could climb above the Czech Republic for first if the Czechs lose to Switzerland. Denmark finished its Group A campaign by defeating Kazakhstan, 4-1, with all four goals coming on the power play. The team sits in the last qualifying spot for the quarterfinals. Germany completed group play by holding off Hungary, 4-2. SOCCER Injured Altidore Likely to Miss Copa United States striker Jozy Altidore is likely to miss the Copa América Centenario in June after being ruled out of action for six to eight weeks with a hamstring injury, his club Toronto FC said. Altidore, 26, sustained the injury while taking a penalty kick during a Major League Soccer game on Saturday. Altidore, who had been included in the United States’ preliminary 40-man squad for the June 3 to 26 tournament, has a history of hamstring problems. In 2014 he sustained a hamstring pull in the first match of the World Cup and missed the rest of the tournament. The national team’s coach, Jurgen Klinsmann, must name his 23-man Copa América roster by Friday. REUTERS All news by The Associated Press unless noted.  A version of this article appears in print on , on Page B 12 of the New York edition with the headline: Indians Pound Out 15 Runs on 19 Hits to Rally Past Reds . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              