   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Arts Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Spare Times for Children for Aug. 22-28 By  Laurel Graeber Aug. 21, 2014 ‘Stories and Stilts’ Laura Anderson Barbata has spent part of her artistic career helping children to stand tall — in all senses of the phrase. On Saturday, she will demonstrate that commitment with a Brooklyn event featuring one of her favorite tools of performance: stilts. “I love the metaphor of stilt walking and stilt dancing,” said Ms. Anderson Barbata , a Mexican-born artist who became immersed in those Afro-Caribbean traditions while on a residency in Trinidad and Tobago more than 10 years ago. “It’s about getting up and looking at our world through an amplified perspective and with a wider range.” Young people on stilts, she added, are literally looked up to, a rare experience for the poor families she worked with in Port of Spain and a thrill for any child used to being dwarfed by grown-ups. So young New Yorkers can expect all kinds of high jinks in “Stories and Stilts,” a program incorporating two performances and a stilt-walking workshop. It stems from “Transcommunality: Laura Anderson Barbata, Collaboration Beyond Borders,” an exhibition of the artist’s videos, photographs and her costumed sculptural figures, large and small, on stilts. The show, at BRIC House through Aug. 31, is part of a larger project, also called “Transcommunality.” “It’s about community building and sharing experiences culturally through this one medium, stilt walking,” said Ms. Anderson Barbata, who has also documented the practice in Mexico and the United States. Saturday will add another cultural thread, from Korea. Korean-American teenagers enrolled in Oogie Art , an art-portfolio preparatory school, will lead families through the “Transcommunality” show and present a Korean folk tale there, “The Pious Daughter.” “They’ll be moving around the exhibition as part of the installation,” Ms. Anderson Barbata said. “One person will be on stilts.” That performer is from the Tad-Poles Outreach Program at Amphibian Stage Productions in Fort Worth. After the Korean story, children trained in Amphibian’s stilt walking program will present “Tad-Poles: Cuentos Mexicanos,” “telling the story of Mexico through music and dance,” Ms. Anderson Barbata said, “and also telling the story of stilts.” Jarana Beat , a Mexican-American band, will provide live accompaniment and narration. Then it’s the audience’s turn. Brooklyn Jumbies , a group devoted to the arts of the African diaspora, will teach the technique, starting with very short stilts. “It’s about balance and movement,” Ms. Anderson Barbata explained, adding some uplifting advice for any challenge: “You’re always moving, and that’s how you don’t fall.” (From 11 a.m. to 3 p.m., at 647 Fulton Street, at Rockwell Place, Fort Greene, 718-683-5600, bricartsmedia.org; free.) LAUREL GRAEBER For Children ‘Archaeology Zone: Discovering Treasures From Playgrounds to Palaces’ (Friday, Sunday through Tuesday, and Thursday) Children will step into the shoes of an explorer like Indiana Jones in this permanent exhibition at the Jewish Museum, but the adventures will be purely scholarly. Still, there is plenty of excitement in analyzing artifacts like a jar handle, a clay jug and a bangle and figuring out the purpose behind ancient pieces like a Greek helmet and a bull-shaped vessel. This interactive show, for ages 3 to 10, also includes a recreated room from the Ottoman period (about 1900), where young archaeologists can dress in costume. From 11 a.m. to 5:45 p.m.; until 8 p.m. on Thursdays. 1109 Fifth Avenue, at 92nd Street, 212-423-3200, thejewishmuseum.org. Free with admission: $15; $12 for 65+; $7.50 for students; free for under 18 and members; pay what you wish on Thursdays from 5 to 8 p.m. Arthur Ashe Kids Day (Saturday) The United States Open isn’t just for grown-ups. At this annual pretournament celebration, children can get into the swing of things with a festival of tennis clinics and athletic activities from 9:30 a.m. to 12:30 p.m. The highlights include target-hitting stations; the Hess Express Obstacle Course, where children can test their agility and running skills; the IBM Speedzone, which uses technology to measure the power of their tennis shots; and YouthTennis.com, which features a method of introducing young players to the game with specialized equipment and smaller courts. The day continues with a stadium show of tennis matches and live music — the performers include Hunter Hayes, Shawn Mendes and the Vamps — from 1 to 3 p.m. At the United States Tennis Association Billie Jean King National Tennis Center, Flushing Meadows-Corona Park, Queens, 866-673-6849, aakd.com. The morning festival is free; the stadium show, which has limited tickets, is $10 to $25. Asphalt Green Sprinkler Day (Saturday) All you have to bring is a towel and a desire to get wet. At its first Sprinkler Day, Asphalt Green, the sports and fitness nonprofit, is opening its athletic field — and its faucets — to children. Young people can play in the high-powered sprinklers on the grounds and enjoy flavored ices during a two-hour frolic. From 10:30 a.m. to 12:30 p.m., 555 East 90th Street, Manhattan, 212-369-8890, asphaltgreen.org (click on special events); free. Battle of Brooklyn Commemoration (Sunday) Green-Wood Cemetery wasn’t founded until 1838, but it served as a graveyard for American patriots long before then. In this annual commemoration, the Green-Wood Historic Fund will honor the cemetery’s roots as a Revolutionary War battlefield, where George Washington’s troops fought the invading British in the Battle of Brooklyn on Aug. 27, 1776. The event will include a trolley tour of historic sites (now sold out); performances by Revolutionary War re-enactors, firing muskets and a cannon (12:30 p.m.); a parade from the main gate to Battle Hill (1:30 p.m.); and a ceremony of remembrance (2 p.m.). Washington did lose the battle but, more important, he won the war. Fifth Avenue and 25th Street, Greenwood Heights, Brooklyn, 718-210-3080, green-wood.com; free except for the trolley tour. ‘Bessie’s Big Shot’ (Friday through Sunday) If a cow can jump over the moon, why can’t she fly on a trapeze? In this production at the Swedish Cottage Marionette Theater, the title character, a cow, longs to join the circus. Based on a show that used to tour on the City Parks Foundation PuppetMobile, this theatrical adventure, by Douglas Strich, Alexander Bartenieff and Bruce Cannon, follows Bessie as she follows her dreams. Friday at 10:30 a.m. and noon; Saturday at 1 and 3 p.m.; Sunday at 1 p.m. (After closing this weekend, the show reopens on Sept. 6, running weekends only at 1 p.m.) At 79th Street and the West Drive, Central Park, 212-988-9093, cityparksfoundation.org. Performances are $10; $7 for under 12. Reservations required. ‘Brooklyn Block Lab’ (Friday through Sunday, and Tuesday through Thursday) You can learn a lot from Brooklyn blocks, and that doesn’t mean just the borough’s streets. The Brooklyn Children’s Museum has opened its “Brooklyn Block Lab,” a new exhibition offering visitors a chance to build and explore with four different kinds of blocks: wooden units; Imagination Playground’s foam blocks; Kapla Planks, a Dutch flat wooden variety; and Magna-Tiles, which are equipped with magnets. And the museum is serious about the space as a lab: Educators will document how the interactions among children there help facilitate language development. (Through Aug. 31) The lab is open daily, except Monday, from 11 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. (The museum is open from 10 a.m. to 5 p.m.) At 145 Brooklyn Avenue, at St. Marks Avenue, Crown Heights, 718-735-4400, brooklynkids.org. Free with museum admission: $9; free for members and under 1; free to all on Thursdays from 3 to 5 p.m.; this Friday from 3 to 7 p.m.; and every third Thursday from 3 to 7 p.m. Children’s Museum of the Arts Free Art Island Outpost (Saturday and Sunday) This island fun doesn’t require a flight to distant shores. The Children’s Museum of the Arts is offering another summer of weekend workshops on Governors Island, exploring a variety of crafts and materials. The theme this season is “Dreamscapes,” with projects in visual arts, theater games and filmmaking, all devoted to fantasy and adventure. (Through Sept. 28). From 11 a.m. to 3 p.m., outside Buildings 11 and 14; Nolan Park, Governors Island, 212-274-0986, cmany.org/summer; free. ‘City Splash’ (Friday through Sunday, and Tuesday through Thursday) Summer in New York can feel like a concrete oven, but there’s water, water everywhere in this annual installation at the Children’s Museum of Manhattan. Open during regular museum hours (weather permitting), “City Splash” invites little visitors to explore water and its properties. Activities include investigating bubbles; digging through ice for fossil reproductions; experimenting with buoyancy; and making music from containers filled with varying levels of water. (Through Sept.) From 10 a.m. to 5 p.m.; until 7 p.m. on Saturdays; open until 8 p.m. the first Friday of every month; Sussman Environmental Center, the Tisch Building, 212 West 83rd Street, 212-721-1223, cmom.org. Free with admission: $11; $7 for 65+; free for members and under 1. An Evening Ride on the Forest Park Carousel to End Alzheimer’s (Friday) Most carousel rides don’t go anywhere, but those taken in Forest Park on Friday evening will actually make some progress toward a goal: curing Alzheimer’s disease. All proceeds from this family occasion will benefit the New York City Chapter of the Alzheimer’s Association. In addition to rides on the carousel’s hand-carved animals and chariots, the event will feature a magic show, a raffle, face painting and refreshments. From 6:30 to 8:30 p.m., rain or shine, Forest Park, entrance at Woodhaven Boulevard and Forest Park Drive, Woodhaven, Queens, alznyc.org/carousel; $10 for unlimited rides; $3 for individual rides. Family Field Days (Saturday) Children are invited to have a field day — in all its meanings — at Brooklyn Bridge Park. At Pier 6, the park staff will provide equipment and guidance for all kinds of outdoor sports and activities, from old-fashioned games, like potato-sack races and freeze tag, to volleyball, basketball and soccer. From 10 a.m. to 1 p.m., Atlantic Avenue and Furman Street, Brooklyn Heights, brooklynbridgepark.org/events; free. Family Adventures: ‘Focusing on Nature’ (Friday through Sunday, and Tuesday through Thursday) You can’t really see plants grow, but you can capture the experience through a technique like time-lapse photography. This program at the Everett Children’s Adventure Garden, part of the New York Botanical Garden, explores how cameras and other technology have influenced humans’ observations of the natural world. Activities will include observing and recording flowering patterns; potting sunflowers (and learning how to make a time-lapse video of one developing); and investigating early devices like the camera obscura. (Through Sept. 19.) Saturdays and Sundays from 10 a.m. to 5:30 p.m.; weekdays from 1:30 to 5:30 p.m.; Bronx River Parkway (Exit 7W) and Fordham Road, the Bronx, 718-817-8700, nybg.org. Free with an all-garden pass: $20; $18 for students and 65+; $8 for ages 2 through 12; free for under 2 and members. Family Friday: Flexifun: A Night of Creative Construction (Friday) Math really is child’s play for Richard Elaver. He’s the designer of Flexure, a new building toy that can be used to make all kinds of models, from chemical formulas to funny creatures. All the construction depends on plane and solid geometry, which children ages 3 to 13 can explore, along with Flexure itself, in this program, part of the Family Fridays series at the National Museum of Mathematics. From 6:30 to 8 p.m., 11 East 26th Street, Manhattan, 212-542-0566, familyfridays.momath.org; free, but registration is required. Field Station: Dinosaurs (Friday through Sunday, and Tuesday through Thursday) It’s not unusual to see giants in the Meadowlands, but some of those attracting visitors to that area of New Jersey these days don’t wear helmets or play football. At Field Station: Dinosaurs, the 20-acre park filled with more than 30 animatronic prehistoric creatures — including a Tyrannosaurus rex, a stegosaurus and a 90-foot-long Argentinosaurus — the dinosaurs move when approached, and the three-quarter-mile trail offers other paleontology exhibits and a mock fossil dig. The park’s programs and shows now include a 23-minute 3-D movie, “Dinosaurs Alive!,” about dinosaur hunting in Mongolia and New Mexico. From 10 a.m. to 6 p.m., 1 Dinosaur Way (off Exit 15X of the New Jersey Turnpike), Laurel Hill Park, Secaucus, N.J., 855-999-9010, fieldstationdinosaurs.com. In advance, $20 to $35 (different prices include different perks); $17.50 to $30 for ages 3 through 11. At the box office, $25 to $40; $20 to $35 for children. Free for 2 and under. (Movie admission is $5 if bought separately.) Fort Greene Park Summer Literary Festival (Saturday) Generations of American authors have drawn inspiration from nature, and some, including Walt Whitman and Marianne Moore, have done so specifically in the Fort Greene neighborhood of Brooklyn. Each summer the New York Writers Coalition encourages children and teenagers to follow their example in a free six-week program of creative writing workshops in Fort Greene Park. The program culminates in this outdoor festival of readings, which features not only the young workshop participants but also adult authors. This year, the festival’s 10th, the grown-up readers will include Sapphire, Danny Simmons Jr. and Willie Perdomo. At 2 p.m., near the monument, park entrance at DeKalb Avenue and Fort Greene Place, Brooklyn, 718-398-2883, nywriterscoalition.org; free. An after-party will follow at Greenlight Bookstore, 686 Fulton Street, at South Portland Avenue, Fort Greene. Rain location for the festival: BRIC Arts/Media House Stoop, 647 Fulton Street, at Rockwell Place, Fort Greene. FringeJR and FringeHigh (Friday through Sunday) On the fringes of the New York International Fringe Festival — not marginalized, just not for grown-ups — is FringeJR, a series of theatrical adventures for ages 5 to 12. The offerings tend to have the same offbeat sensibility as other Fringe productions, but nothing that would make young audiences (or their parents) blush. This final weekend offers, on Friday at 3:45 p.m. and on Saturday at noon, “Alienne: The Musical Adventures of My Little Martian,” a show about a teenager from Mars who would really like to be an Earth girl. The other two children’s productions that are still playing, from the company ExtraTeatro in Rome, are bilingual musicals that help children learn a little Italian: “My Monster Friend,” on Saturday at 1:45 p.m., focuses on a mad scientist who creates a creature, à la Frankenstein, using a brain he ordered on the Internet. (Guess the brain’s country of origin.) And “Vagabond$,” Friday at 5:30 p.m. and Sunday at 1:45 p.m., is about a twosome with a language barrier but a mutual embrace of showbiz. All the shows are at the Theater at the 14th Street Y, 344 East 14th Street, East Village. And teenagers are by no means left out: the festival also offers FringeHigh, shows recommended for adolescents, which tackle challenging themes. Full schedules and performance details are on the festival website. Tickets and more information can also be obtained at FringeCentral, the Clemente Soto Vélez Cultural Center, 114 Norfolk Street, near Rivington Street, Lower East Side, fringenyc.org. Shows are $18; $13 for 65+; FringeJr shows are $13 for children and can be bought in person only. ‘The Gazillion Bubble Show: The Next Generation’ (Friday through Sunday, and Wednesday) Children love bubbles, and this interactive show promises not just a gazillion but also some of the largest ever blown, along with light effects and lasers. The stars are the members of the Yang family: Fan and Ana Yang and their son Deni and others, who rotate as M.C.’s for the production. Audience members may even find themselves in bubbles of their own. (The run is open-ended.) Friday at 7 p.m.; Saturday at 11 a.m. and 2 and 4:30 p.m.; Sunday at noon and 3 p.m.; Wednesday at 11 a.m. and 2 p.m.; New World Stages, 340 West 50th Street, Clinton, 212-239-6200, gazillionbubbleshow.com; $55 to $75; lap seats for ages 2 and under are $20, cash only, at the box office. V.I.P. seats, including a toy and other perks, are $99.50. ‘Genndy Tartakovsky’ (Saturday and Sunday) This Russian-born animator may not be a household name like Disney, but many children have probably seen his work. This weekend the Paley Center for Media is celebrating his early career with screenings that include two of his most famous creations: Dexter, the boy genius turned mad scientist, and Dee Dee, Dexter’s perky airhead sister. On the menu are episodes of “Dexter’s Laboratory” and “Dexter & Dee Dee,” as well as the full-length “Samurai Jack: The Movie.” From 12:10 to 2 p.m., 25 West 52nd Street, Manhattan, 212-621-6800, paleycenter.org; $10; $8 for students; $5 for under 14. ‘Great White Shark’ (Friday through Thursday) Seeing this new Imax film at the American Museum of Natural History may inspire fear — not for the safety of humans, but for that of sharks. Shown in both 2-D and 3-D, this documentary explores the fate of great white sharks, which have been driven to the brink of extinction by the market for shark fin soup. Filmed in waters off Mexico, New Zealand, South Africa and the California coast, the work captures sharks in their habitats, including a sequence in which great whites are shown breaching in 3-D. Hourly, from 10:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m., with 2-D screenings at 10:30 a.m. and 12:30 p.m.; all other screenings are 3-D. At Central Park West and 79th Street, 212-769-5200, amnh.org. Included in Museum Plus One admission (general admission and one Imax film or special exhibition): $27; $22 for students and 60+; $16 for ages 2 to 12. Member tickets: $13.50; $8.50 for children. ‘The Greek Monsters’ (Friday through Sunday) Construction crews aren’t all that have invaded the Onassis Cultural Center NY during its renovation; a host of mythological monsters have moved in, too. The center asked Beetroot, a Grecian design group, to install this exhibition of sculptures, bas-reliefs and paintings in the Olympic Tower atrium while work was going on. In the show, which closes on Sunday, children can meet characters like the Cyclops, Medusa, the Minotaur and Cerberus (the three-headed dog that guarded the underworld). Daily from 10 a.m. to 8 p.m., 645 Fifth Avenue, at 51st Street, onassisusa.org; free. ‘Jazzed! The Changing Beat of 125th Street’ (Friday through Sunday, and Tuesday through Thursday) Young visitors may want to put on their dancing shoes before they visit this new show at the Children’s Museum of Manhattan. Then again, on certain days they can just wait and make a pair there. Presented in conjunction with the National Jazz Museum in Harlem, this exhibition revisits the Harlem Renaissance with displays dedicated to major jazz figures, highlighting Ella Fitzgerald, Bill (Bojangles) Robinson and Duke Ellington. Activities include song, dance, investigations of musical composition and craft workshops that include, yes, building your own tap shoes. Live jazz performances are also a regular part of the show. (Through Dec. 31.) From 10 a.m. to 5 p.m.; until 7 p.m. on Saturdays; open until 8 p.m. the first Friday of every month; Tisch Building, 212 West 83rd Street, 212-721-1223, cmom.org. Free with admission: $11; $7 for 65+; free for members and under 1. Kids Cruise (Saturday) The best cruises are like the one in Maurice Sendak’s “Where the Wild Things Are,” in which young adventurers can have a great rumpus and still be safely home for dinner. That’s what Circle Line offers in its series of children’s sails. Each trip consists of a 75-minute voyage to the Statue of Liberty (with a chance to take a photo there), as well as entertainment. This week’s voyage includes the Berenstain Bears and the children’s pop band Baze and His Silly Friends. Boarding at 9:30 a.m.; sailing at 10 a.m.; Pier 83, West 42nd Street and 12th Avenue, Clinton, 212-563-3200, circleline42.com; $29; $20 for ages 3 to 12; free for 2 and under. ‘The Lightning Thief’ (Friday) At first glance, Percy Jackson might seem like an average — maybe even below-average — kid. He struggles with dyslexia and impulse control, and school has never come easy. But as fans of Rick Riordan’s young-adult novel of the same title know, he’s actually the half-mortal son of a Greek god, who in this adventure must recover Zeus’ stolen lightning bolt. Joe Tracz and Rob Rokicki have adapted Mr. Riordan’s book into an hourlong musical, presented in Theatreworks USA’s annual Free Summer Theater Program, which ends this Friday. At 10:30 a.m. and 1 p.m., Lucille Lortel Theater, 121 Christopher Street, West Village, twusa.org. Reservations are accepted only for camps and youth programs and for those making a minimum $50 donation to the free summer theater program; one reserved seat for every $50 donated. Free tickets for the public are otherwise distributed first come first served, starting an hour before each performance, with a limit of four per adult per day. ‘The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe’ (Saturday) If the children of the Pevensie family could travel to the magical land of Narnia through something as simple as a wardrobe, why shouldn’t two hard-working actors be able to play them and all the characters found there? That’s what Abigail Taylor-Sansom and her husband, Rockford Sansom, who recently joined the cast, are attempting in the Off Broadway Family Theater’s first production, le Clanché du Rand’s adaptation of C. S. Lewis’s classic novel. (The run is open-ended.) Saturdays at 11 a.m., St. Luke’s Theater, 308 West 46th Street, Clinton, 212-239-6200, narniaoffbroadway.com; $35. Macy’s Fishing Clinics (Saturday and Sunday) Fishing tends to be enjoyable for almost everyone but the fish. Yet the species involved here can’t complain too much: They are all returned live to Prospect Park Lake. Open to eager anglers 15 and younger, these annual summer clinics, part of the series Pop-Up Audubon, involve not only fishing and safety instruction, but also an introduction to aquatic ecology. All equipment is provided. At 1 and 3 p.m., at two locations in Prospect Park: Wellhouse Drive, accessible from the Vanderbilt Street entrance, and White Levy Esplanade at Lakeside, reachable from the Parkside Avenue and Ocean Avenue entrance, Brooklyn, 718-287-3400, Ext. 303, prospectpark.org/pop-up-audubon; free. MoMA Art Lab: Movement (Friday through Thursday) It’s easy to think of art as monumental and fixed, but many creative works move, or at least appear to. This interactive space for children at the Museum of Modern Art is devoted to the idea of motion, whether it’s in a mobile, a moving picture, a performance or the artist’s hand applying paint. Activities in the lab relate to different works in the museum’s collection: Preschoolers can build structures incorporating movement; older children can try their hands at stop-motion animation. (Through Aug. 31.) Daily from 10:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m.; to 6:30 p.m. on Thursdays and Fridays; Lewis B. and Dorothy Cullman Education and Research Building, 4 West 54th Street, Manhattan, 212-708-9400, moma.org/artlab. Free with museum admission: $25; $18 for 65+; $14 for students; free for ages 16 and under. ‘Monday Night Magic’ (Monday) This show bills itself as the longest-running Off Broadway entertainment of its kind. (It opened in 1997.) Every Monday a different group of magicians appears (or disappears, as the case may be), offering illusions, sleight of hand and an occasional thrill, like knife throwing. The performers planned for this week are Will Shaw, Jeff Grow and Uncle Tony. At 8 p.m., Players Theater, 115 Macdougal Street, at Minetta Lane, Greenwich Village, 800-551-4767, hollywoodpop.com/mondaynightmagic; $66.50 to $72.50; $10 discounts available on phone orders with the codes HPG-Prem or HPG-VIP. ‘Peace, Love, and Cupcakes: The Musical’ (Saturday and Sunday) Vital Theater Company’s latest children’s musical, revived but at a new theater, takes place on one of the most treacherous, complicated and unrelenting battlefields to which America has sent its young: middle school. An attempt to attract audiences as old as 12, the show draws on the first novel in a series by Sheryl Berk and her young daughter, Carrie Berk. Though not always plausible, the production, written by Rick Hip-Flores, offers a brisk, entertaining and well-acted hour as it explores what happens to the misfit heroine, Kylie Carson, when she starts a cupcake club that threatens to become even more popular than the reigning mean girl at school. (Through Aug. 30.) Saturdays and Sundays at 4 p.m., Marjorie S. Deane Little Theater, 10 West 64th Street, Manhattan, 212-579-0528, vitaltheatre.org; $30; $40 for premium seats. ‘Pinkalicious, the Musical’ (Saturday and Sunday) That rosy little girl is back. This long-running production of Elizabeth and Victoria Kann’s adaptation of their children’s book, from Vital Theater Company, is now at the Majorie S. Deane Little Theater. The pink-obsessed title character finds out that sometimes being in the pink can be too much of a good thing — especially when eating too many pink cupcakes has turned her pink from head to toe. John Gregor wrote the score and some of the lyrics. (Through Aug. 31.) Saturdays and Sundays at 1 p.m., 10 West 64th Street, Manhattan, 212-579-0528, vitaltheatre.org; $30; $40 for premium seats. RiverFlicks Family Fridays: ‘The Wizard of Oz’ (Friday) You may not be able to go to drive-in movies anymore, but the RiverFlicks series in Hudson River Park has something even better: walk-in movies. The films in its Family Fridays, all rated PG, are screened under the stars on Pier 46, and even the popcorn is free. This week young audiences can also travel over the rainbow with the final family film of the summer: the 1939 classic “The Wizard of Oz.” At dusk, usually about 8:30 p.m., Charles Street and the Hudson River, West Village, 212-627-2121, hudsonriverpark.org. Stories at the Statue of Hans Christian Andersen (Saturday) Not everything that blooms perennially in Central Park is a flower or a tree. Storytelling also returns there each summer, as the city’s Parks and Recreation Department, the Central Park Conservancy and the Hans Christian Andersen Storytelling Center bring narrative performers to Andersen’s statue every Saturday. The series, for ages 6 and older, continues this Saturday with Andersen’s “Thumbelina” and the Haitian tale “The Old Woman.” At 11 a.m., inside the park at 72nd Street and Fifth Avenue, rain or shine, hcastorycenter.org; free. ‘A Voyage Through Jewish History’ (Sunday through Thursday) This journey involves not just miles, but years. In this permanent interactive exhibition at the Jewish Children’s Museum, young visitors can travel from Abraham and Sarah’s tent to the Western Wall in contemporary Jerusalem and beyond. Activities along the way include giving water to Rebecca’s camels, playing the strings on David’s harp (a high-tech version with beams of light that emit sounds when struck) and taking part in the exodus from Egypt. Through Aug. 31, the museum will also present “Summer Safety 2,” an exhibit consisting of a road course that children can walk or drive through (using pedal go-carts), in which they’ll learn how to navigate city streets safely. Usual museum hours are Mondays through Thursdays, 10 a.m. to 4 p.m.; until 5:30 p.m. on Sundays; 792 Eastern Parkway, at Kingston Avenue, Crown Heights, Brooklyn, 718-907-8833, jcm.museum; $13; $10 for 65+; free for under 2. Wave Hill Programs (Saturday, Sunday and Thursday) This public garden in the Bronx offers many ways for the youngest visitors to commune with nature, including art, storytelling and, this week, a bird walk. This Saturday and Sunday, from 10 a.m. to 1 p.m., at Wave Hill House, the weekend family art project, “T’s of Summer,” will involve sketching a favorite garden scene and then using fabric markers to put the image on a T-shirt. On Sunday only, at 8 a.m., children over 10 are invited to join adults in the garden’s Early Morning Bird Walk, in which the naturalist Gabriel Willow will introduce visitors to some winged early risers. On Thursday at 2 p.m., the summer’s last event in the Stories in the Garden series welcomes children ages 3 to 6 to hear tales in the verdant shade (or inside Wave Hill House if it rains). The program, “Animal Family Matters,” will be devoted to reading books about creatures and their relatives, including the P.D. Eastman classic “Are You My Mother?” At Independence Avenue and West 249th Street, Riverdale, the Bronx, 718-549-3200, wavehill.org. The bird walk, which has limited space, requires registration online, by phone (at Ext. 251) or at the Perkins Visitor Center; it costs $18; $10 for members. The art project and stories are free with garden admission: $8; $4 for students and 65+; $2 for children over 6; free for members; free to all on Saturday until noon. ‘What’s Up, Doc? The Animation Art of Chuck Jones’ (Friday through Sunday, and Wednesday and Thursday) A whole lot of great cartoons, that’s what’s up. Chuck Jones (1912-2002), for many years one of the creative geniuses at Warner Bros., helped give life and indelible personalities to sassy characters like Bugs Bunny, Daffy Duck, Wile E. Coyote, the Road Runner and many more. This new exhibition at the Museum of the Moving Image salutes his artistry with sketches, story boards, animation cels and photographs. Through Oct. 4, the Drop-In Moving Image Studio each Saturday, from noon to 5 p.m., will feature “Animation Takeover,” helping children older than 7 use Jones’s ideas to create their own projects, from flipbooks to short animated videos. And every Saturday and Sunday during the show’s run, at 1 p.m., the museum will present programs of Chuck Jones screenings. This weekend “‘Duck Amuck’ and Other Cartoons” will star — no surprise — Daffy, as well as a certain wiseguy rabbit. (Through Jan. 19.) Hours: Fridays, 10:30 a.m. to 8 p.m.; Saturdays and Sundays, 11:30 a.m. to 7 p.m.; Wednesdays and Thursdays, 10:30 a.m. to 5 p.m.; 35th Avenue at 37th Street, Astoria, Queens, 718-784-0077, movingimage.us. Free with admission: $12; $9 for ages 65+ and students; $6 for 3 to 12; free for under 3 and members. Screenings are first come first served, though members can reserve seats by phone. LAUREL GRAEBER A version of this article appears in print on , on Page C 26 of the New York edition with the headline: Spare Times: For Children . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              