   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Travel Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Travel Tips How to Get the Most Out of a College Town Vacation By  Shivani Vora July 27, 2017 Image Credit Lars Leetaru Whether you are a student or not, college towns make for enjoyable vacation destinations, said Ben Weprin, the chief executive and founder of Graduate Hotels , a collection of nine hotels in the United States in places with large universities (Graduate Berkeley in Berkeley, Calif., is one). “College towns are rich with history and culture,” he said, “and offer lots of great activities, both on and off campus.” Here, Mr. Weprin shares his advice on how to get the most out of a college town vacation. RELY ON THE UNIVERSITY TO HELP PLAN YOUR ITINERARY The college in the town you are visiting is the best source of information about local happenings. Visit the school’s website ahead of your trip to learn about the area’s attractions, which, Mr. Weprin said, many colleges list on their sites. He also suggested that travelers call the college’s main office to inquire about any notable events during the visit. Staff members there are usually happy to share such information. GO TO A GAME There is no better way to feel the spirit of any college, Mr. Weprin said, than by watching one of its teams play a game. “You’re surrounded by students and their families, alumni, faculty and locals who are all cheering on the team,” he said. “Being part of that energy is exciting and fun.” Football tends to be a popular choice, but seeing other sports such as basketball, lacrosse or soccer is equally enjoyable. GO TO  USED BOOKSTORES AND VINTAGE RETAILERS Did you know that college towns are a gold mine for secondhand bookstores and vintage retailers? “Both tend to be well preserved in college towns and sell unique goods that are hard to find, even in bigger secondhand stores in large cities,” Mr. Weprin said. Off Square Books , in Oxford, Miss., home to University of Mississippi, and the Dawn Treader Bookshop , in Ann Arbor, Mich., home to the University of Michigan, are two examples. BE INDEPENDENT Be sure to check out independent retailers such as coffee shops, boutiques and restaurants — these thrive in college towns because they reflect the personality that makes the particular destination special. “Visiting these homegrown stores will give you a sense of place, which a big chain can’t do,” Mr. Weprin said. His favorite independent retailer is Licorice International , in Lincoln, Neb., home to the University of Nebraska-Lincoln; the store claims to have the largest collection of licorice in the United States. SEE A CONCERT College towns are music towns with frequent performances by famous and lesser-known musicians. Mr. Weprin encourages music fans to get a ticket, and even plan their visit around an especially big act. And be open-minded about artists you haven’t heard of. “Legendary groups got their start in college towns, like the B-52’s, who became famous after playing at the University of Georgia” in Athens, Mr. Weprin said. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page TR 2 of the New York edition with the headline: Studying Up for a College Town Vacation . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              