   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Sports Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Sports Briefing Jordan Spieth Shoots a 63 to Lead the Travelers Championship By  The Associated Press June 23, 2017 Jordan Spieth hit a wedge to 4 feet for birdie on the final hole for a seven-under-par 63 and a one-stroke lead Thursday in the Travelers Championship in Cromwell, Conn. Making his first appearance at TPC River Highlands, Spieth, a 23-year-old Texan, had eight birdies and a bogey in his afternoon round after tying for 35th last week in the United States Open at Erin Hills in Wisconsin. Johnson Wagner and the Connecticut native Brett Stegmaier each shot 64 in the morning. Stegmaier had seven birdies in a nine-hole stretch in the middle of the round and closed with a bogey on No. 9. Rory McIlroy, also playing for event for the first time, had a 67. Jason Day shot 72. They missed the cut in the Open. GARCÍA TWO BACK IN MUNICH Sergio García opened his first event in Europe since his Masters victory by shooting a bogey-free six-under 66 to lie two strokes off the lead at the BMW International Open in Munich. Image Quarterback Derek Carr, who led the Raiders to the playoffs last year, signed a five-year contract extension. Credit Marcio Jose Sanchez/Associated Press PRO FOOTBALL Carr Completes Deal With Raiders Oakland Raiders quarterback Derek Carr completed a five-year contract extension that will keep him with the team through the 2022 season. Carr tweeted that an agreement had been reached to add five years to his current rookie deal that expires after this season. The Raiders are counting on Carr to be the face of the franchise when it moves to Las Vegas for the 2020 season. Both sides had expressed a strong interest in signing a long-term deal. Carr, who was scheduled to enter the final year of his rookie contract, had imposed a deadline of the start of training camp in late July. Carr has transformed the Raiders from a perennial loser into a contender after being drafted in the second round in 2014. He lost his first 10 starts as a rookie before winning seven games his second year and taking the Raiders to the playoffs in 2016 with a 12-4 record. Carr missed the final game of that season and the playoff loss to Houston with a broken leg. CHIEFS’ REID GETS EXTENSION The Kansas City Chiefs have given Coach Andy Reid a contract extension and parted ways with General Manager John Dorsey, making two important decisions on what is typically a quiet week in the off-season. Reid, 59, is 43-21 with three playoff appearances in four seasons in Kansas City, helping to deliver an A.F.C. West title last season. SOCCER Sánchez Scores as Chile Ties Germany Alexis Sánchez struck early to become Chile’s all-time leading scorer as the South American champions were held by Germany’s young squad to a 1-1 draw in Kazan, Russia, that left both teams in good position to advance to the semifinals of the Confederations Cup. Sánchez netted his 38th goal with the Chilean national team by poking the ball into the net with his left foot after a smart pass by Arturo Vidal in the sixth minute. The ball hit the near post before crossing the line to allow the Arsenal forward to pass the 37 goals scored by Marcelo Salas. Germany, with only three players from its World Cup-winning team, played catch-up most of time against the more experienced Chileans, but it earned a draw after Lars Stindl scored from close range in a counterattack just before halftime. The result left both teams with 4 points each in Group B, three more than Australia and Cameroon, which played to a 1-1 draw in St. Petersburg. SALAH HEADING TO LIVERPOOL Egypt wing Mohamed Salah will get another chance to prove himself in the English Premier League after sealing a move to Liverpool from Roma. Financial details were not disclosed, but sections of the British media reported that Liverpool paid 39 million euros ($43.5 million) for Salah. Salah, 25, made just six league starts during his time playing for Chelsea from February 2014 to February 2015 before being sent on loan first to Fiorentina and then Roma. He was one of Serie A’s top performers last season, scoring 15 goals and setting up 11. TENNIS Federer Makes Quarterfinals in Germany The eight-time champion Roger Federer defeated Mischa Zverev, 7-6 (4), 6-4, to book his quarterfinal place at the Gerry Weber Open in Halle, Germany. Federer, who is bidding for his 16th grass-court title, hit five aces and converted three of his four break opportunities. He next plays the defending champion Florian Mayer, who upset the sixth-seeded Lucas Pouille, 6-7 (6), 6-4, 6-3. AFTER UPSET VICTORY, DEFEAT The unheralded Australians who blew open the draw at Queen’s with first-round wins over Andy Murray and Milos Raonic came back down to earth. Jordan Thompson, a last-minute injury replacement, and Thanasi Kokkinakis, ranked No. 698, both lost in the second round in London. AZARENKA OUSTED IN SECOND ROUND The former world No. 1 Victoria Azarenka’s comeback ended in a second-round defeat at the Mallorca Open, with the two-time Grand Slam title winner losing, 6-1, 6-3, to Croatia’s Ana Konjuh. (AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE) SURPRISING LOSS IN BIRMINGHAM Elina Svitolina suggested she might withdraw from Wimbledon after a surprise second-round loss at the Aegon Classic in Birmingham, England. Svitolina, ranked fifth and the leading seed after a host of withdrawals, was beaten by the Italian qualifier Camila Giorgi, 6-4, 4-6, 6-2. BASEBALL Goldschmidt Powers Diamondbacks Paul Goldschmidt and Chris Owings hit three-run homers, Zack Godley threw well into the eighth inning, and the Arizona Diamondbacks beat the Colorado Rockies, 10-3, in Denver. Goldschmidt finished with three hits and four R.B.I. to increase his season total to 64, tops in the majors. Arizona took two of three in the National League West matchup and is now tied with Colorado for second place in the division behind the Dodgers. The Diamondbacks have won 12 of 14 and are a season-high 19 games above .500. IT’S NOW DAVID ORTIZ DRIVE Boston has renamed a street in honor of the retired Red Sox player David Ortiz. Mayor Marty Walsh called the man known as Big Papi a “legend on and off the field” at the ceremony to rename the street formerly known as Yawkey Way Extension, near Fenway Park, to David Ortiz Drive. The Red Sox are scheduled to retire his No. 34 on Friday. CUBS SEND DOWN SCHWARBER The Chicago Cubs demoted the struggling slugger Kyle Schwarber to Class AAA Iowa. Schwarber is batting .171 with 12 homers and 28 R.B.I. in 64 games. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page B 14 of the New York edition with the headline: Golf; Spieth Shoots 63 to Lead the Travelers by One . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              