   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index College Basketball Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Ohio State’s Kelsey Mitchell Got an Early Start on a Dash to Stardom Image Kelsey Mitchell in a game against Connecticut on Monday. “There’s no shot that she can’t make,” Huskies Coach Geno Auriemma said. Credit Jessica Hill/Associated Press By  Howard Megdal Dec. 23, 2016 HARTFORD — Women’s college basketball uses a 30-second shot clock. More often than not, by the time an Ohio State possession ticks down to 29, the junior guard Kelsey Mitchell, a 5-foot-8 flash of distilled hoop skills, will have crossed midcourt. Reaching destinations fast is not anything new for Mitchell, one of the most highly regarded players in the country. Her father, Mark, now an Ohio State assistant, remembered the moment he first understood Kelsey was on her way to remarkable achievements on the basketball court. He and his wife, Cheryl, have two sets of twins. The boys are four years older than the girls — Kelsey and Chelsea, now teammates at Ohio State. Mark was coaching the boys in a youth league, and 4-year-old Kelsey insisted on tagging along, wearing the team’s uniform and begging her father to get into the game. Her father, a longtime coach who had seen too many players burn out early, wanted her to wait to start playing. So he decided finally to put her in the game in the hope she would struggle, which would slow down her aspirations. Image Mitchell shooting against Canisius this month. She is averaging 22.4 points per game. Credit Paul Vernon/Associated Press “Well, the worst thing happened,” Mark Mitchell recalled. “She got a steal, she dribbled down, made a 10-foot jumper. Made another. Ended the game with 8 points, couple steals, couple assists. So my wife asked me, ‘Was that the plan?’ No, the plan was to get her to go back in the stands.” On the court is where you are likely to find Kelsey Mitchell ever since. She estimated she had gone out “two, maybe three times” in her college life. She remembers dressing as a boy, putting her braids up, just to be sure she could play in certain games. The Buckeyes’ coach, Kevin McGuff, said: “I’m not sure I’d even want to know how much time she spends in the gym. It’s just all the time.” She grew up playing with boys years older than she was, competing against anyone she could. Her mother, Cheryl, played basketball at Eastern Kentucky, where she met Mark, who starred on the football team. Cheryl was from Memphis, and when the Mitchells visited family there, Kelsey would find any game she could, just as she did back home in Cincinnati. “We’d play in high school gyms against top high school players, and then playground, against a lot of old school people,” Mitchell said. “So that’s molded me into what I do now — quick shot, or different moves, is from being able to play basketball all over.” Sports in 2016: Winners, Losers and Cheaters From a baseball player turned hit man to the amazing ability of Simone Biles, a look at some of the most compelling stories of the year. Dec. 21, 2016 To watch Mitchell is to experience a kind of basketball savant who, like a basketball junkie, effortlessly recalls the plays she has seen. But she has the far rarer gift of being able to emulate those moves, an Allen Iverson YouTube mix come to life. Connecticut experienced that this past week. The undefeated and top-ranked Huskies are a far more finished product over all, while Ohio State is still mixing in transfers like Linnae Harper, Stephanie Mavunga, Sierra Calhoun and Shayla Cooper with freshman Kiara Lewis and Mitchell. “When she first got here, we had a few good players, but not a ton,” McGuff said. “Now, as we add more good players, it’s an adjustment for her. A, we have to get everybody going fast, and B, we have to make sure we’re utilizing everybody’s talents. And that’s an adjustment for her, because we didn’t really have to do that at the beginning, because we didn’t want as many people involved.” But there are things Mitchell can do that no one can combat, not even mighty Connecticut. With the Buckeyes off to a slow start, trailing by 19-7, Mitchell used her quickness to streak to the hoop for a layup while drawing contact. Next trip down, she buried a 10-foot jumper. Then she stole a ball in traffic, raced down the floor and fed Cooper for another hoop. On the final possession of the quarter, Mitchell grabbed a defensive rebound, took the ball to about 30 feet from the basket, put it between her legs once and then buried a 30-footer over a defender five inches taller as time expired. The Connecticut coach, Geno Auriemma, just shook his head. “She’s impossible to guard — you saw that,” Auriemma said after the game, an 82-63 Connecticut victory. “There’s no shot that she can’t make, won’t take. She gets a head of steam up, forget it. You’re not going to stop her.” Mitchell is 22 and a junior, so she will have a decision to make in the spring as a draft-eligible player. She watched this past season’s W.N.B.A. finals with interest, but she said she had not begun to think about whether this would be her final year at Ohio State. Her coach has, though. “I don’t think there’s any question that she’s the No. 1 pick in the draft, whenever she comes out,” McGuff said. “And I think any team that passed on her would live to regret that.” Her overall points per game are down a bit this season, to 22.4 from 26.1, but her true shooting percentage and assist percentage are up. That reflects her growth into a more complete playmaker — like the players Mitchell has on her computer screen any chance she gets: the schoolboy great Aquille Carr, the Minnesota Lynx star Maya Moore and the Cleveland Cavaliers point guard Kyrie Irving. One player Mitchell says she does not like to watch is herself, though she forces herself to do it to improve. Her father and McGuff acknowledged that they were too busy trying to turn the Buckeyes (10-4) into champions to truly relish the pleasures of their jobs, which include breaking down Kelsey Mitchell game film. But Mark said that when the Mitchell family gathers in Cincinnati for Christmas, Kelsey’s brothers will break out the game tapes as they always do. And the gathered group will exchange superlatives as it takes in her latest exploits. McGuff thought that sounded like a good idea. “I probably don’t do that enough, because we’re in such a grind, so I’m watching for specific reasons, figuring out how we can get better,” McGuff said. “But hopefully at some point, I can take a little more pleasure in just watching her play.” A version of this article appears in print on , on Page SP 4 of the New York edition with the headline: After Early Start, Ohio State Guard Is Hard to Stop . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Related Coverage At U.C.L.A., a Highly Rated Show Fails to Pack Them In Dec. 23, 2016 Image After The Shot, Villanova’s Kris Jenkins Sets His Sights Higher Dec. 21, 2016 Image Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              