   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Weddings Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Emily Baldwin, Frederico Padilha Image Credit E.H. Wallop Sept. 24, 2017 Emily Sieck Baldwin and Frederico Gilson Padilha were married Sept. 23 at the bride’s family home in Bridgehampton, N.Y. The Rev. David A. Davis, a Presbyterian minister, officiate. The couple met at Stanford, from which each received an M.B.A. The bride, 29, is an associate brand manager for Pepperidge Farm in Norwalk, Conn. She graduated cum laude from Vanderbilt University. She is the daughter of Margaret J. Sieck and Robert H. B. Baldwin Jr. of Bridgehampton, N.Y. The bride’s father retired as the vice chairman of Heartland Payment Systems, a company in Princeton, N.J., that specialized in credit, debit and prepaid card processing and payroll services. Her mother is a former senior editor at Sports Illustrated and Sports Illustrated For Kids magazines. The bride’s grandfather, the late Robert H. B. Baldwin, was formerly the chairman of Morgan Stanley, and served as under secretary of the Navy under President Lyndon B. Johnson. The groom, 32, is a manager at McKinsey & Company in New York. He has two undergraduate degrees, one in electronic engineering from the Pontifícia Universidade Católica in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, and the other in industrial engineering from the École Centrale de Paris, in France, from which he also received a master’s degree in that subject. He is the son of Margaret M. G. Padilha and Fred M. Z. Padilha of Rio de Janeiro. The groom’s mother is a fashion designer in Rio de Janeiro. His father retired as the chief financial officer of Telebrás, the holding company of Brazil’s telecommunication system. The couple met in August 2013 on a pre-business school trip to Colombia for incoming students of the Graduate School of Business at Stanford. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page ST 15 of the New York edition with the headline: Emily Baldwin,  Frederico Padilha . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              