   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Theater Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by What’s New in NYC Theater Image David Greenspan in Eugene O’Neill’s “Strange Interlude.” See listing below. Credit Richard Termine for The New York Times By  Alexis Soloski Nov. 16, 2017 Our guide to plays and musicals coming to New York stages — and a few last-chance picks of shows that are about to close. Our reviews of open shows are at nytimes.com/reviews/theater. Previews and Openings ‘CRUEL INTENTIONS: THE MUSICAL’ at (Le) Poisson Rouge (previews start on Nov. 17; opens on Dec. 11). The 1990s teen flick, which reset “Dangerous Liaisons” in an elite Manhattan prep school, has transformed its bittersweet symphony of lust and betrayal into a jukebox musical, created by Lindsey Rosin and Jordan Ross. The students Sebastian Valmont and Kathryn Merteuil conspire to complicate the lives of their classmates. cruelmusical.com ‘HARRY CLARKE’ at the Vineyard Theater (in previews; opens on Nov. 21). In this new work written by the veteran monologuist David Cale (“Lillian,” “A Likely Story”), Billy Crudup may drop more than his aitches. Mr. Crudup plays a shy Midwesterner who reinvents himself as a Cockney Englishman and inveigles his way into a wealthy family. Leigh Silverman directs. 212-353-0303, vineyardtheatre.org ‘PETER PAN’ at the Duke on 42nd Street (in previews; opens on Nov. 19). Do you believe in Bedlam? The theater company , that is, known for its high-energy small-cast productions of the classics. Now it’s off to Neverland with its adaptation of J. M. Barrie’s 1904 play. Eric Tucker directs a cast of lost boys and girls, including Mr. Tucker himself. 646-223-3010, dukeon42.org ‘PRIDE AND PREJUDICE’ at the Cherry Lane Theater (in previews; opens on Nov. 19). It’s a truth universally acknowledged that most of us really enjoy a good Jane Austen adaptation. The actress Kate Hamill, who authored a beloved stage version of “Sense and Sensibility,” turns her laptop to the Bennet sisters. Amanda Dehnert directs this production from Primary Stages and the Hudson Valley Shakespeare Festival, which stars Mark Bedard, Jason O’Connell and Ms. Hamill. 866-811-4111, primarystages.org ‘SCHOOL GIRLS; OR, THE AFRICAN MEAN GIRLS PLAY’ at the Lucille Lortel Theater (in previews; opens on Nov. 16). In Jocelyn Bioh’s comedy about beauty, difference and malice, the pupils at a Ghanaian girls school compete for their shot at beauty pageant fame. Under the Tony winner Rebecca Taichman’s direction, Zainab Jah and Myra Lucretia Taylor star in this MCC production. 866-811-4111, mcctheater.org ‘THE WOLVES’ at the Mitzi E. Newhouse Theater (in previews; opens on Nov. 20). Sarah DeLappe’s prizewinning play about a high school soccer team returns to the field. When the show, directed by Lila Neugebauer, ran last year, Ben Brantley wrote that the “scary, exhilarating brightness of raw adolescence emanates from every scene .” 212-239-6200, lct.org Last Chance ‘THE B-SIDE’ at the Performing Garage (closes on Nov. 19). Eric Berryman, who conceived this record album interpretation with members of the Wooster Group, takes the needle off “Negro Folklore From Texas State Prisons,” a 1965 compilation of music performed by inmates and collected by a folklorist. Ben Brantley wrote, “This is music that feels viral not in the technological sense of current usage, but in the sense of residing in the bloodstream .” 212-966-3651, thewoostergroup.org ‘STRANGE INTERLUDE’ at Irondale Center (closes on Nov. 18). It takes an extraordinary man to perform the entirety of Eugene O’Neill’s Pulitzer Prize-winning play for Transport Group. And that man, David Greenspan, can finally take a rest. Laura Collins-Hughes described his “masterful” performance as resembling “a recitation, a prayer, a madness, a modern ballet.” 866-811-4111, transportgroup.org ‘TIME AND THE CONWAYS’ at the American Airlines Theater (closes on Nov. 26). J. B. Priestley’s play moves back and forth in the lives of one English family, but as Broadway time is more linear, the play ends its run. Elizabeth McGovern stars as the matriarch of a family faltering between the wars. Jesse Green wrote that while parts of the play “come off as obvious exercises in dramatic irony ,” other parts “look at the world as it really is and are freshly gripping.” 212-719-1300 , roundabouttheatre.org A version of this article appears in print on , on Page C 23 of the New York edition with the headline: Theater . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              