   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Corrections Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Corrections: February 16, 2014 Feb. 16, 2014 FRONT PAGE A White House Memo article last Sunday about issues of protocol that arose after President François Hollande of France broke up with his partner, Valérie Trierweiler, just weeks before a White House State Dinner misstated the length of time the United States has been without an ambassador to Paris. The post has been vacant since November, not since last summer. • An article last Sunday about the financial struggles of Puerto Rico misidentified the governor under which laws meant to entice wealthy investors to the island were enacted. They were signed in 2012 by Gov. Luis Fortuño — not by the current governor, Alejandro García Padilla, who is aggressively promoting them. • A picture caption last Sunday with an article about the effects of a Nigerian law that criminalizes homosexuality described incorrectly the person shown re-enacting the lashing of a man convicted under the law in northern Nigeria. He is a bailiff, not a judge. INTERNATIONAL An article last Sunday about the advance of chikungunya fever, a mosquito-borne virus, in the Caribbean referred incompletely to its possible spread beyond that region. While the virus has not yet reached the United States, both species of mosquitoes that carry it can be found in the country, and experts said it could be contracted in the United States in the warmer months. In addition, a picture caption misspelled, in some copies, part of the name of one of two species of mosquitoes that carry the virus. The species is Aedes aegypti, not Aedes aegpyti. (The other one is Aedes albopictus.) SPORTS An article last Sunday about Ramogi Huma, the president of the newly formed College Athletes Players Association who is seeking to organize football and basketball players, referred incorrectly to the rise of television revenue in college sports. Recent television contracts for the five largest conferences, the college football playoff and the postseason basketball tournaments will bring in $1.2 billion more annually than in previous years; the contracts do not bring in $1.2 billion each year. The article also misstated Huma’s involvement with Allen Sack, the founder of the Drake Group, which seeks educational reform in college athletics. While Huma did work on studies that documented scholarship shortfalls, he did not do so with Sack. EDUCATION LIFE An article last Sunday about challenges facing Howard University misstated its federal appropriation. It was about $200 million a year over the past decade, not a total of $200 million during that time. ARTS & LEISURE A picture last Sunday with an article about Bryan Cranston’s portrayal of Lyndon B. Johnson in the Broadway drama “All the Way” carried an erroneous credit. The photograph of Mr. Cranston in a production of the play at the American Repertory Theater in Cambridge, Mass., was taken by Evgenia Eliseeva, not by Ursula Coyote/AMC. • The Video column , last Sunday, about “It’s a Mad, Mad, Mad, Mad World” (1963), described incorrectly the $10 million the movie cleared. That was the amount in rental fees that the producers recovered at the box office; it was not the box office gross, which was roughly $20 million. And the entry on the 1966 movie “Khartoum” misstated the given name of the film’s producer. He was Julian Blaustein — not Julius. AUTOMOBILES A review on Feb. 2 about the 2014 Cadillac CTS misstated the output of the TwinPower 4-cylinder engine in a competing model, the BMW 528i. It is 240 horsepower, not 300. NATIONAL An article last Sunday about Bernie Tiede, who was convicted in 1999 of killing Marjorie Nugent, referred incorrectly to Dr. Richard Pesikoff of the Baylor College of Medicine, who commented on the case. He is a clinical professor of psychiatry, not a clinical professor of psychology. REAL ESTATE The Exclusive column last Sunday, about an apartment to be listed for $8.75 million at 50 Gramercy Park North, misstated the monthly maintenance fee. It is $11,258, not $11,528. • The Streetscapes column on Feb. 2, about the windows on the 1912 Cherokee Apartments on the Upper East Side, misidentified a designer whose aesthetic influence is seen in the windows, as well as the significant decorative element of the early Paris subway for which he was responsible. He was Hector Guimard, not Victor Horta, and he designed subway entrances, not kiosks. TRAVEL The Frugal Traveler column on Feb. 2, about Budapest, contained several errors. The street on which the writer saw a storefront where a man was making violin bows is Nepszinhaz Street, not Nepshinhaz. A dish made of turkey breast, ham and cheese served at the Frici Papa Kifozdeje restaurant does not have a name; it is not called sonkaval, which means “with ham.” The Faust Wine Cellar in the Buda Castle complex is at the Hilton Budapest Hotel, not the Budapest Sheraton Hotel.And the name of a D.J. at Morrison’s Liget, a nightclub, D.J. Szecsei, is simply a name; it is not the transliteration of the word “sexy.” • An article on Feb. 2 about restaurants in Dublin misstated the name of the main street that runs through the Stoneybatter neighborhood. It is Manor Street, not Stoneybatter. The article also referred incorrectly to two restaurants, Chapter One in Dublin and Chapter One in Kent, England. There is no business connection between the two; the one in Kent is not an outpost of the one in Dublin. • The cover article on Feb. 2 about Istanbul misstated the century in which the Cihangir Mosque was built. It dates from the late 19th century — not from the 16th, which is when the original mosque was built. (It burned down.)  The Times welcomes comments and suggestions, or complaints about errors that warrant correction. Messages on news coverage can be e-mailed to nytnews@nytimes.com or left toll-free at 1-888-NYT-NEWS (1-888-698-6397). Comments on editorials may be e-mailed to letters@nytimes.com or faxed to (212) 556-3622. Readers dissatisfied with a response or concerned about the paper’s journalistic integrity may reach the public editor at public@nytimes.com or (212) 556-7652. For newspaper delivery questions: 1-800-NYTIMES (1-800-698-4637) or e-mail customercare@nytimes.com . A version of this article appears in print on , on Page A 3 of the New York edition with the headline: Corrections . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              