   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index The Learning Network Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Current Events Conversation On Happiness, Social Media, Collecting Things and Olympic Sports: Our Favorite Student Comments of the Week Image Related Article Credit Monica Jorge for The New York Times By  The Learning Network Feb. 8, 2018 It was a busy week of commenting on our site, as this lengthy collection of favorite responses to our recent writing prompts will show. Wilmington, N.C., we love hearing from your students each week. As regular contributors, if you have any feedback, or would like to suggest particular Times articles we should choose for our prompts, please let us know in the comments. (Actually, that goes for anyone reading this!) This week we also want to recognize a new group from Maine , and let old favorite programs like YC-CLIP know that it’s good to see your students back on the site. Enjoy! Please note: All student comments have been lightly edited for length, but otherwise appear just as they were originally submitted. _________ Image Jennifer Chen, left, and Sean Guo are among the almost 1,200 students taking Laurie Santos’s “Psychology and the Good Life,” at Yale. The class was recently moved to Woolsey Hall, the university’s concert venue, from Battell Chapel, which could only accommodate a crowd of 800. Credit Monica Jorge for The New York Times We thought the answer to our Student Opinion prompt “ Should Schools Teach You How to Be Happy? ” would likely be an enthusiastic “yes!” — but responses were mixed. Riley Thibault from Maine thought such a class would be unnecessary: I think the school should offer resources for students to feel happy but not offer classes like Yale is. I think the school should stick to academics and not turn classes into a rehab centers. I would be O.K. with if the school were to offer a program in which students were taught to make others happy. I think this way because you come to school to learn not feel better that what hospitals are for. With saying that, I do think schools should offer resources and help for those feeling unhappy. Immanuel Libby from Maine disagreed: I think that, since happiness is different for different people, it will be difficult to teach, and the material taught will not be perfect for every specific situation … [but] as long as it works and people are becoming happier, I think it’s a fantastic idea that will help the stress of college life, especially at a school like Yale. Esther Ofielu from Maine sees the benefits of learning about positive psychology: I would not want my school to offer this class. I don’t think the kids in my high school would take it seriously. They would probably just be on their phones the entire time. However, I do think schools should at least offer a class on happiness, maybe not on how to get it. But rather on how studies show others feel happiness. I think this class would be better as a psychology class on happiness. Sophia Elliopulos from Maine believes a class like this could help students manage their stress: I think I would like to have a class like this because I get so wrapped up in the pressure to do well in school that I sometimes put my happiness to the side and only focus on school. I think if my school had this class it would actually improve academics because when I’m stressed I will do worse than if I am calm about it. I think this class should be graded but only for effort. It would be kind of counterproductive if you were getting stressed about a class that teaches you how to not be stressed. But Emma H. from Maine suggested that everyone needs to find happiness on her own: After reading this article and gathering my thoughts I think that a course that teaches students how to be happy is unnecessary. I think it is nice to offer the class to colleges that are known to high stress levels and expectations, however I do not think the class will help in the long run and it may just be a temporary relief for student workload … I think it is important to find happiness and a positive life style on your own as a way to grow as a person instead of following advice given from psychologists. Faith Beaulieu from Saco agreed: I do not think that happiness should be graded at all. Though the class is a good idea, I still do not believe happiness can simply be taught. Happiness comes to people in different ways, because we’re all so different. Nonetheless, the course seems to be helping a lot of people and I do support that. However, Maryam Pate from Falls Church, Va ., argued that a class on happiness could be a positive step toward solving mental health problems: Yale’s class on happiness brilliantly addresses a crisis happening in educational institutions nationwide. Whether it is in high school or college, metal health experiences follow students into adulthood, and create habits that will play a role in defining one’s success. Dr. Santos referenced “[numbness]” as a feeling by many students, and rightfully so, because often times it may not be depression that consumes students, but rather a lack of happiness or pathways to it. I would encourage educational institutions, including my own, to offer a class on happiness and gratified living, that can shape overall moods on campus, and put graduates on a path for healthy success. A class on happiness should be graded, so that students’ progress can be kept and students can see a conscious growth within themselves through self-reflection. For me, a form of self-reflection is gratitude. I have taken up remembering what it is that makes me happy to take me out of stressful situations and find that it is little skills like that, that will take me far. _________ Image Nick Foles, the backup quarterback, has carried the Eagles through the playoffs. Credit Matt Rourke/Associated Press Did you watch Super Bowl LII ? While the majority of commenters — who predicted a Patriots win — may have been disappointed in the game, Brook Myers from King of Prussia was ecstatic: 1.) I looked forward to the game 2.) I hoped and got what I wished for, THE EAGLES WON! 3.) #9: Foles This year I was especially excited for the Super Bowl because the Eagles were playing and they were the team I was rooting for. I love this time of year because there are great commercials, good food, and a game you can yell your head off about. And Charles from Atlanta enjoyed the whole spectacle: The Super Bowl is known for the memorable commercials and halftime show, but this year the main attraction was the thrilling showdown between the Philadelphia Eagles and New England Patriots. Which was your favorite? Was it the hilarious rap battle between Peter Dinklage and Morgan Freeman, or the halftime show featuring JT? Super Bowl LII was one that will go down in history. On Feb. 4, 2018 at U.S. Bank Stadium in Minneapolis, Minnesota, Nick Foles (Eagles Quarterback) became the second player to ever start the season as a backup, and win the Super Bowl as a starter. Who was the first player to do it? Tom Brady, of course. The Eagles outlasted the Patriots 41-33 in a nail-biter to land the Eagles their first ever Super Bowl. However, the M.V.P. of the game might’ve been Justin Timberlake when he performed “I Would Die 4 U” by Prince to honor him since Prince is from Minneapolis. _________ Image Justina Blakeney designed her master bedroom to feel like a romantic retreat, with gold wallpaper and antique French doors. “Every single time I go into my bedroom,” she said, “I feel like I’m on vacation.” Credit Dabito Our Picture Prompt A ‘Feel-Good’ Room elicited wonderful descriptions about the details that can make a room feel like one’s own. JJ from Northeast can finally breathe after a room redo: After a break-up and many years of neglecting my space, I finally gave it a fresh rehaul. And I decided to go minimalist. All those little knick-knacks that was supposed to recall good memories? Gone. All the sticks of furniture that were laden with history (even good history) … gone. All the doodads that might, just might, be useful at some point … also gone. A friend suggested I just start creating a board of images I loved. And I learned that I really do have a certain feel I really love, certain colors and hues I’m drawn to, but it was not being reflected in my space. So now, with a new pared down look with only colors and textures I love — I find this is my ‘feel good’ room. There isn’t as much personal junk — instead, the space is a strong statement of style I have an affinity and an affection for. It leaves a lighter footprint. I feel free, unshackled from possessions. I can finally breathe. Ian Derushia from Wilmington, N.C ., is proud of his personalized space: My room, no not room, my getaway, is one of my most prized possessions. Well my parent’s possessions. My room is made up of everything that is a part of me. Whether it be my salt rock lamp, or my eucalyptus pillow spray and silk pillows. I balanced out bulky shelves with a small Polaroid string. The lights I strung around the perimeter of my ceiling remind me of summer nights on the lawn with my mom in Raleigh as we would watch for shooting stars and the different hues if fireworks on the Fourth of July. I believe that I styled my bedroom exactly to fit me. My bed spread is like that of a hotel’s comforter. Reminding me of family vacations to florida or georgia or oregon. My color palette (Teal, wood, and white accent) maybe subliminally represent my longing to be anywhere on the water. The hammock could represent my swing-easy attitude, and the sondbar system: my love for movies. Hannah from  Wilmington chose things herself: I recently, with the help of my parents, completely redid my room. Nothing is remotely similar than it was before and I absolutely love it. My room now completely reflects who I and creates a sanctuary all for myself. From my Beatles poster to my waterfall fish tank, it’s all genuinely me. The colors I chose myself, I finally have a plant of my own and continue to add to my haven every day. My painting of Venice along with my outline of the world reflects my unmatched urge to travel as far as I can. Nothing in here isn’t a part of who I am and I couldn’t have it any other way. James C from North Carolina says his room supports his well-being: I have designed my room to support my well being by keeping it fun with small things. I have a small smiley face sticker on the wall from when I went to the orthodontist and first got my braces next to my bed, and an Eddie Van Halen poster on my wall. The Eddie Van Halen poster makes me happy like how I feel when I listen to his music. This is all I really need or want to have on my walls … I put nostalgic items like birthday cards from my grandparents, or my parents on my dresser to make it look nicer. All of the things in my room make it my room, and help me relax. _________ Image Credit Stuart Bradford In response to the Student Opinion question, “ Are You a Perfectionist? ,” students told us about their personal struggles with the feeling of needing to be exceptional, and shared some ways they managed that need: Victoria Jackson from Wilmington, N.C. , sets high standards for herself, but often to her own detriment: I’ve been struggling with perfectionism for almost all my life. I’ve naturally always gotten good grades and at first I never really thought about it, but over time I started to become obsessive with the amount of studying I put in and the outcome of my work. I definitely put pressure on myself and set extremely high standards. Since last year I’ve known that I wanted to be a neurologist. I began to research the career even more and set the goal of getting amazing grades for the rest of high school so I can get into a credited college and later on medical school, to prepare myself for the rest of my career and life. So, me being my overachieving self, I’ve put in a lot of work into my schoolwork and make sure it’s perfect and worthy of a good grade. I often work myself too hard to the point where I have a mental breakdown. Recently my english teacher gave us an assignment of choosing one word we’d like to represent the person we want to become this year. I want to become less of a perfectionist (but still reaching most of my goals) and become less stressed and confident in my abilities, so I chose the word faith. Since I started the assignment, I’ve noticed a tremendous change and already see my extreme perfectionist tendencies vanishing. I learned the hard way that being a perfectionist can be beneficial and build you up, like getting good grades, but can also tear you down and consume you in a sea of stress. Reagan O’Shea from Boston, Ma., similarly described the mental and emotional toll of perfectionism: Growing up in a world in which the pressure to succeed and stand out is at its peak, it is difficult to not fall victim to being a “perfectionist”. Though being a perfectionist can be a positive attribute, I for one feel as though it is an exhausting attribute that most often leads to disappointment. No matter how well a “perfectionist” does, their performance never seems to be good enough. As a perfectionist, I hold very high standards and goals for myself, and when I fail to meet those standards, the disappointment that I feel is incredibly overwhelming. … What people fail to understand is that such achievements do not come without a substantial cost: the overwhelming burden that one feels through many stages of life is sometimes unfathomable. Catherine Smer from Wilmington, N.C. , however, has let go of the idea of being perfect: No, I am not a perfectionist at all. I don’t believe that any one thing can be truly perfect. However I do believe in trying my best. I know that whatever I do at my age can’t be perfect but as long as I have given it the best that I have got then I don’t stress over it. I value the opinions of my family, teachers, and classmates, they all influence how good or bad my work is, but the only opinion that matters the most when counts is my own. Don’t get me wrong, I try hard in school and sports and I want a good future for myself, but setting standards for everything as high as “perfect” can cause stress and anxiety that I don’t need. Monalene Delo from Wilmington, N.C. , thinks social media adds to the many young people’s anxiety: Often on social media we find our selves scrolling through our feed wishing we had the life that our friend had, or that we had this amount of likes or “Wow, her life must be perfect!” Social media has provided a mask to our actual lives that we are living … Sometimes we just need to remind ourselves that people aren’t living the perfect life that we think they are and that we’re doing the best we can. And, like many other students, Emily Lane Player from Hoggard High School , felt pressure from her family to be successful: I would not label myself as a perfectionist, I always try to do my best and go with the flow. However, I do strive to work hard and get good grades, but I know if I get one B it won’t be the end of the world. I try to find a balance between schoolwork and just being a teenager. My dad is a lot like me in this way, we’re both very type B. However, my sister is the total opposite. She is the definition of a perfectionist. She doesn’t just strive for A’s, she strives for A+’s, in classes 2-3 grades above her grade level, and if she doesn’t meet her goal she constantly beats herself up about it. On top of this, she dances for 4-5 hours a day. She has a really hard time letting go of things if they aren’t absolutely perfect. She is a constant stress-ball, like my mom. My mom is a perfectionist as well, as she projects this onto me with her high expectations. Often, I feel they’re way too high, and I just can’t do enough to please her. Whenever I do accomplish something I’m proud of, like getting an A on a really hard test, I rarely rewarded because that’s just what’s expected of me. She often treats me how she would treat herself, and I’m not a perfectionist so her standards seem impossible. Seeing the advantages and disadvantages of perfectionism, Juliet Hoven from Nazareth, Pa. , suggested some strategies for managing it: Because of my perfectionism, I do not take many breaks. I always seem to be running somewhere or spending an obsessive amount of time improving something that does not necessarily need to be perfect. As a student, I study for long periods of time and do a lot of homework. In fact, I do not socialize as much because my standards push me to exceed. To manage the muddle my high standards create, I have tried to create a schedule to manage my time and make myself available for what I enjoy doing, and for my grades and community. I also make different study methods for my own benefit. When I get stressed or overwhelmed, I try to relax and take a break such as listening to music or watch a quick TV show. Overall, high standards can be both beneficial and detrimental. _________ Image Oaxacan murals by the Tlacolulokos artist collective in the Los Angeles Central Public Library. Credit Emily Berl for The New York Times Some of our best-written commments this week came in response to the Picture Prompt “ Murals , ” which asked students whether art can be a form of resistance. Commenters responded passionately and eloquently, giving examples from history. Eve Krupcheck from Massachusetts believes art’s power lies in its ability to unite people: Liberty leading the people, the murals painted on the Berlin wall, and the women’s march logo. All these images are more than just murals and paintings. Art unites people under a common image. One painting or one image can be the face of a revolution or what the movement is remembered by. For example the “Everyone is welcome here” which can be seen around America in storefront windows in other places. It is what is spread and seen by people. Or look at Liberty leading the people the image we all associate with the French Revolution. Art gives one unforgettable image for a moment to be remembered by. Watching history throughout the years it is clear that art mirrors the way people feel. Take the dada art movement for example. People were disillusioned after WWII and it was the new types of art that showed that. Art is people’s true feelings and anger used productively to make something creative and inspirational. Art can unite and build support. Art shows how people feel. Art is not just paint on wall and canvases. Art is what begins the revolution. Beck RT from Massachusetts thinks its accessibility is what makes it so influential: I believe that art can be an act of resistance. Art can be created in an abundance of forms and is given to everyone to access, no matter who you are or what your background. By creating art, it gives the creator as well as others the ability to emote and show opinion through these images. I believe in this ideal because of how widespread art is and how many forms that it may take. Similarly, Prashamsha Rayamajhi from Danvers, Mass. , wrote passionately about the history of political art: I do think that art can be an effective method of resistance — and I believe so because art has been one of the most profound factors in shaping society as we know it. Any major change in history came with a change in the arts. For example, the Renaissance cam with rebirth of culture — and art is what led us out of the “darkness” of the Middle Ages into the intellectual sophistication of the Renaissance. Art belongs to the people; it always has. We saw that with the birth of hip-hop as a form resistance to an unjust government. In the history of humans, there has always been art as a constant. It has shaped any major event that has happened — political cartoons, a form of art, has managed to overwhelmingly affect the course of wars and politics. Art has always been about the people, and it can be a very effective method to bring about change and resistance. Art is what makes “political” things or heavy subjects that aren’t really talked about, a major topic in popular culture. Art is what makes us human, and in cases like the Holocaust where the government tried to entirely erase a group’s humanity, the simple existence of art can be a form of resistance. Ann Nguyen from Massachusetts says that art stimulates empathy: Art can be an act of resistance. Throughout history, ordinary people have turned to art for political expression and social defiance of standards in their government, nation, and/or society. One notable movement that required art was the Civil Rights Movement, which sparked in the 1960s. While direct involvement in protests and lawsuits moved forward the goal of racial equality for black citizens, art captured the deep and complex themes and emotions associated with the oppressed minority. Viewers could empathize with the subjects in paintings and murals, which demonstrate pain and distress. For example, Norman Rockwell’s 1964 painting “Rockwell & Race” depicts violence against civil rights workers, an unfair issue in America that requires social change. Ava Daly from Danvers High School pointed out how it can act as a microphone to marginalized voices: Although some may say that art is a luxury nowadays, with all the bad that is going on in the world, I think that art is a way that we can make a change. When we feel like we are losing our voices, art can speak for us, and make public the change that we want to see. And Zac Gill from Wilmington, N.C. , demonstrated how art can uniquely express the raw emotion of resistance: I personally think the greatest art comes from those resisting. Those in a dire time of need have the most to express. They can completely fill their art with the purest emotion possible. I am a very strong believer that art is an amazing way to vent and allow your audience to almost empathize with whatever it is you’re going through. An example of resistance in our nation’s past can be shown through many of the famous poet Langston Hughes’ poems. Hughes wrote from the perspective of a black man in a nation against him and the raw emotion displayed in his poetry puts you there. Hughes alone shows how beneficial resistance can be within art. Not all students were convinced that art could be a form of resistance, though. As Bronwyn Williams from  Wilmington, N.C. , said: As a student artist, naturally, I was drawn to this topic. As someone who believes that you should work to see a change, naturally, I was drawn away from this topic. I mean, no offense, but come on. Nothing’s going to change if we just sit around making art that expresses our unease with our situations. I can draw as many political works as I want, nothing is going to change my situation unless I try to improve it for myself. While yes, maybe your art can help shift the mind of someone who is already slightly partial to your views and ideals, your art isn’t going to save the world or have as big of an impact as you think unless you have influence … If making pretty pictures and clothing is all you’re doing in the hopes of a societal reform, I’m afraid we’re not living on the same planet. I say yes, do continue to create art maybe for the comfort of others who find solace in your work, but know that it’s rather optimistic to think that the change you want lies within the creative works of yourself or others. _________ Image Credit SeongJoon Cho/Bloomberg After Lindy West, an author and contributing Opinion writer, wrote about giving up Twitter to preserve her mental health, we wanted to know: “ Would You Quit Social Media? ” We received responses from those who had, those who thought they could — and those who never would. Yamelly Taveras from Rhode Island has tried quitting social media before: I deleted my twitter account in November because of all the constant negativity and anxiety I would get over scrolling through my feed. The whole idea about social media is a great concept, but there are a lot of things that make it very unappealing. I noticed that social media has really become a self obsorbed realm of eye candy and feeds all of our insecurities. Or, on the other end, a place where people can spew their hate for the world to see and comment on with their own idiotic opinions. I spent only a month away and realized how much time I allowed it to consume my life. I had to fill my time with more productive things and it honestly felt so good. I currently co-run my church’s young adult Instagram page so I need to be on social media for that reason, but other than that, getting rid of it for good would be no problem to me. Renee Joynes from Wilmington, N.C. , thinks it could be a good idea: I have thought about giving my social media up once before and now with lent coming up my friend was talking about how she is going to give up her social media and I thought that was a very good idea and something that I would want to do. I feel like in life we often don’t believe in ourselves so we don’t even try, but I think it is important to give up social media or even just take a break from it because we often don’t realize what we are missing until we have a different perspective. Also since my generation has basically grown up with social media we don’t know how life would be without it, so why not give it a try. Mohammed3D from YC CLIP argued that getting off his favorite apps could actually hurt his friendships: I would never consider to quit any of the social media because I want to stay in touch with my old friends and know about their lifestyle, so you feel like you are close to them even if they are living in a different country. I have never have conflict with social media. Instead I enjoy using social media because you get to know about your friends, what he have done whole week, also what is going on the Earth. And when Katharine from  Rhode Island was challenged to do so by her teacher, she gained a whole new perspective: I think the best thing one can do is find a balance, where you reap the good things that come with social media, while maintaining a distance, so one doesn’t become addicted or find oneself fully entrenched in a “Twitter war.” In the spirit of the article, my teacher challenged us to quit social media for a day, and found myself doing more chores, something I usually wouldn’t have time for. However, I think this indicates my failure to find the balance between productivity and pleasure. Sydney Knowles from Roswell, Ga. , sees the benefits and drawbacks of using Twitter: I am a regular Twitter user, as well as using Instagram, Facebook, Tumblr, Snapchat, and other sites. I think that I could give up social media for a short period of time, perhaps a month, and I would benefit from it. Without social media I would have much more time on my hands, and the amount of negative news I consume would decrease. I don’t think that I would want to give up social media permanently though, because it is a free tool at my disposal, whether I use it for putting myself out there, finding funny stories, sharing laughs with my friends, or anything else. As an aspiring journalist, I know that having a social media presence will be important, if not essential to my career. Even though it may include fighting off trolls and managing threats, it will be worth it to have immediate access to news and a large platform to promote myself on. Presley Church from Boulder, Colo. also uses social media to advance their career: Though I was long opposed to using social media platforms, I don’t think I will ever get rid of them now that I am involved. I have experienced first hand the whole other level of friendship and social involvement you miss out on without these platforms, especially snapchat at my age. Not only is social media important socially, but I believe that I will need it professionally. I want to work in the fashion industry, which is heavily promoted via imagery. Social media platforms are how I promote my personal brand, and how the fashion industry communicates with its followers. The benefits of giving up social media are not worth the community and professional-aid I would be losing. MeenSeo Kim from Seoul strives for a healthy balance with social media use: I use Facebook and Instagram regularly but 5 years ago, I considered to give up these social media platform and I actually did it for a short time. The reason was I spent so much time on it. Now I use it but only 30 minutes a day... I look up some fun stuff and share good information with my friends. How could I changed? The biggest difference from 5 years ago and now is I don’t care so much friendship in there. I post things whenever I love to, I reply to my friend who lives overseas. Social media enhances quality of life if you can moderate but if you can’t control yourself, it’s better you to quit social media. Social media can be part of your life, not everything. I think I will need social media for some time for my career because I want to work in organizations relatedwithwomen’s rights in the future. I guess social media would provide many data and many people’s real experience. _________ Image Browsing at a meeting of the Metropolitan Postcard Club of New York City, where thousands of postcards were for sale. Students responded to our Student Opinion question “ What Do You Collect? ” with all sorts of interesting choices, from coins to stuffed animals, rocks, records, mugs, video games, postcards and more. Inspired by family members, Rosser Baxley from Wilmington, N.C. , has amassed a collection of 300 vinyl records: I may not be a postcard collector myself but one thing that is for sure is that I love vinyl records. When I buy vinyl I don’t buy online. There is nothing like feeling the record and looking at the art within, it’s beautiful. I guess you could say that I cheated; but here’s how I acquired around 300 records. My great-aunt’s son died and he left behind precious records like sly and the family stone, The Beatles, The Allman Brothers Band, and the Grateful Dead. Bronwyn Williams from Wilmington, N.C. , didn’t set out to create a collection, but “what is it if not a collection?” she asks: This wasn’t intentional, really, it wasn’t. Naturally, however, if you really like something you’re going to want more of it, right? What am I talking about? Video games. I’ve been obsessed with the things since I was a little kid in pre-school. I remember my first Nintendo DS, it was a cute pastel pink and I loved it until it couldn’t handle all the Hershey’s Kisses wrappers I shoved into the cartridge slot so my family wouldn’t know that I ate all that candy in one night. Back on track, just looking to my left I realize that I might have a problem. Stacks of games upon games, most of which I don’t even have the time to beat or replay (I would kill for an hour alone with Ocarina of Time or Majora’s Mask), and yet I want more. As soon as I hear about the next new release, I want it so bad. I heard about the new Xenoblade and I wanted it but I wasn’t even a third of the way through the first Chronicles. And that’s how they stack up. I never thought of it as a collection up until now and it’s a weird way to think about it, but what is it if not a collection? Collectors themselves kinda freak me out. Like, don’t get me wrong, they’re not malicious, but as much as I love video games, I would definitely never shell out upward of $26,000 for an authentic 1990 Nintendo World Championship cartridge. If it makes you happy though and you don’t neglect your health in favor of obsession, go for it! Grant Holland from Wilmington, N.C. , inherited his coin collection and its special memories: My grandparents started a coin collection back in 1999 saving every quarter from each state and placed it into a coin collection book. My grandparents were not able to finish the collection, so I decided to finish it. Now I have a coin collection of every state dating back to a Delaware coin made in 1787 to the final coin made in Hawaii in 1959. Now, I may not have an exotic collection, but it is a collection that has a valuable meaning behind it. Every time I look at the collection it reminds me of my grandparents. Though not a collector herself, Leah Schwagerl from Wilmington, N.C. , has seen from firsthand experience how collections sustain cultures: (part 1) I don’t collect anything, yet, maybe it’s because I’m not passionate or fascinated by any one particular materialistic thing. Or maybe it’s because I don’t like the look of clutter (an image I’ve associated with collectors since watching American Pickers). I feel like collectors are attracted to certain collection items thanks to past memories. (part 2) I haven’t picked my dad’s brain about it, but maybe that’s why his face lights up when he finds an especially old and unique quarter or a book written in the 19th century about historic forts. Most importantly, at the core of collection is culture. Clubs made of collectors exist because they are on the search for culture. Jen Nguyen from Wilmington, N.C. , thinks collections can also create bonding experiences: Together, my family collects mugs from different places we’ve been to. We tend to travel a lot, with or without each other and we like to collect the mugs as reminders as to where we’ve been and what we’ve experienced. It’s always exciting when someone comes back from a place for a long time and gets to place the new mug in the cupboard and tell stories about it at the dinner table. For instance, this summer I went to a camp in a different state and I got to put my own mug in the cupboard for the first time. Getting to tell my family about the exciting things I experienced alone was exhilarating because it was something I’ve been looking forward to for a while. Huberney4D from YC CLIP started his collection at age 9, when he first came to the United States: The first time I came to the United States at the age of 9 years old. I felt amazed by the 25¢ coins (Quarters) because they were completely different from what I knew of coins. Back in my country all coins where the same. They were uniform with no variety. When I first purchase in a store and got my change I noticed that my two quarters were different from each other .They have different image carve in the coin follow by a different state name of the fifty that forms the USA. I just had acknowledged not every coin was the same. It were different since that day I start collecting the quarters from every state and date. I get to collect more than 70 coins, I was very proud of my collection. And Brooke from Wilmington made the connection between collecting material items and nostalgia: The reason why I collect things is so I can remember. There are so many things that occur day to day and it can be hard to remember every little thing that has transpired in our lives. Collections allow people to reminisce past events or memories that are significant to them. They bring people back to the moments that shaped them. My most sentimental collection is definitely my postcard collection. Whenever I go to a new place I try to find a postcard from the area that I know will remind me of the moments and adventures that occurred. Every few months I’ll come across my box of postcards and I’ll dive into all of the memories. Feelings of joy and bliss rush through my mind every single time as I’m reminded of all the little wonderful moments. I think everyone should have a collection of some sort. Image Credit Carl Richards _________ When it comes to “ Real Friends vs. Facebook Friends , ” students were unanimous in their agreement that it’s better to connect with people in person than online. Sydney Durner from Wilmington, N.C. , wrote: Nothing can beat the bond of a real person that you can actually see in person and communicate in real time. Although, the internet and apps like Snapchat have made my relationships stronger with people I don’t talk to often or get to see everyday, hanging out with them is much different. Being able to hear their voice, laugh with them, share the same meals and hug them is so much better than any type of phone call or text. It means so much more to you and the other person when you can be in each other’s presence. Isabel from Atlanta gave some examples to support her opinion: Image Credit Illustration by Tatsuro Kiuchi People can get so caught up with virtual friends, they forget who is actually there for them. Facebook friends will leave comments on your posts when your sick. Real friends will visit you, and make sure you are O.K. … A text saying miss you will never compare to how you feel after seeing your best friend for the first time in months. A hug is better than an emoji. Laughing all night together wins against a phone call. Anna Y from Greenwood Village, Colo. , also prefers interacting with friends openly and honestly, face-to-face: When I meet someone in person, I feel nervous and vulnerable going up to them and starting a conversation. I get to know them through their facial expressions, gestures, and body language. Because they are also watching my expressions when I say something — in other words, they notice how I say things as much as what I say — my friends can detect deeper meaning behind what I say. We connect on an emotional level. I could be having an extremely terrible day, but on Facebook, I can hide behind my computer, pretending everything is fine, and my Facebook friends would have no idea. The internet creates a distorting filter where it is more difficult for people to understand one another on an emotional level because they cannot see each other. Online, we have to use a smiling emoji, but face to face, we can just smile. _________ In the spirit of the upcoming games, we asked students: “ What Winter Olympic Sports Are You Most Excited About Watching? ” Brandon Brodwater from Wilmington, N.C. , is looking forward to the snowboarding competition: Snowboarding (or snurfing) has been a staple of winter mountain sporting since its inception. Much like other board sports, snowboarding requires exceptional balance, control, awareness, and skill. Professionals of the snowboarding scene have put their lives into practice and perfection of their craft, and in some cases have become pop culture influences (Sean White). Taking into account the skill required to snowboard at a top level and the vast size of the culture, there’s not a doubt in my mind that snowboarding should be included in the Winter Olympics. Most viewers of the Winter Games would agree, as Sports Illustrated listed the snowboard half pipe as the most popular event from the 2014 games. Tara B from Wilmington, N.C. , is another “snurfing” fanatic: I’m really excited for the Winter Olympics because of the snowboarding. I love the sport and I snowboard when I go up to New York sometimes. My favorite snowboarders are Gabe Ferguson, Shaun White, and Scotty James. Gabe and Shaun are on Team USA and Scotty James is on Team Australia. My all-time favorite snowboarder is Scotty James. I’ve been following him since the X Games and he is truly amazing. He first started skiing at age one and then he started snowboarding three years of age. He started competing when he was six years old. He first went to the Winter Olympics when he was 15 years old, making him the youngest Australian male to compete in the Winter Olympics. And Nick Hargrove from Wilmington, N.C. , hopes to see more extreme sports enter the Olympics: … they could add other “extreme” games. In the x-games snowmobile speed and freestyle competitions are held. Both of these events could be added since the closest thing in the Winter Olympic Events today would be bobsledding. I am most excited to watch the bobsled racing, as well as the speed skating. I find the shorter events to be more entertaining. One Winter Olympic sport that is lengthy that I am intrigued by is the biathlon. The biathlon requires athletes to fire at targets varying from 1.8 to 4.5 inch in diameter based on firing position while being able to cross country ski, competing for the quickest time. I find this event interesting because of the diversity it brings to the Games. Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              