   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Arts Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Spare Times for Children for Aug. 28-Sept. 3 Image Participants at a previous Art Trek at the Metropolitan Museum of Art. Credit Jackie Neale/Metropolitan Museum of Art By  Laurel Graeber Aug. 27, 2015 Art Trek Children might enjoy a Saturday afternoon play date with the neighbors’ kids, but why restrict them when they could spend an hour getting to know families in Europe and Africa? Such travel opportunities come weekly at the Metropolitan Museum of Art, where a longstanding program, Art Trek , introduces visitors ages 7 through 11 to a variety of peoples and eras. “We’re promoting the idea of curiosity and exploration and travel,” said Jennifer Kalter, an associate museum educator. “Even through the name, we’re presenting it as a journey.” Participants meet first in the education wing to discuss the monthly theme — August’s is friends and family — and then head into the galleries. On one recent Art Trek, they looked at “ Just Moved ,” an 1870 painting by the American artist Henry Mosler that depicts parents and children — and a curious cat — settling into a new home. They also visited the American Wing’s period rooms. “We want to put ourselves in the shoes of the people who might have been in those rooms,” Ms. Kalter said. In Art Trek this Saturday, children will examine “ Throne of Njouteu: Royal Couple ,” a wooden stool for a late-19th-century king in Cameroon. Perched atop it are figures of the ruler and his consort, covered in blue glass beads. They’ll also see the parade armor designed for the 5-year-old Infante Luis (1707-1724), prince of Asturias. A boy king (he briefly ruled Spain as a teenager), Luis is believed to have received the armor from his great-grandfather Louis XIV. “If they can connect the pieces to things in their own lives, this makes the work of art in the museum relevant,” Ms. Kalter said. Though today’s children don’t wear armor, they may don school uniforms or athletic gear. And they may have seen relatives pass down treasured objects. With these ideas in mind, young visitors will end this Art Trek by creating symbols for their families or communities. Next month’s theme is transformation. “One approach might be materials,” Ms. Kalter said. “How do you take a tree and make it into a wooden sculpture? How do you start with a piece of saffron and turn it into pigment?” Whatever route is taken, the travel isn’t taxing: Museum admission is free for children under 12. This coming season, the Met will also offer its Bring the Kids initiative — an adult ticket holder can buy up to three children’s tickets for $1 each — for almost every museum concert. Economy class never felt so grand. (Saturday at 11 a.m. and 2 p.m., Carson Family Hall, 212-535-7710, metmuseum.org/events/programs/met-families.) For Children ‘Archaeology Zone: Discovering Treasures From Playgrounds to Palaces’ (Friday, Sunday through Tuesday, and Thursday) Children will step into the shoes of an explorer like Indiana Jones in this permanent exhibition at the Jewish Museum, but the adventures will be purely scholarly. Still, there is plenty of excitement in analyzing artifacts like a jar handle, a clay jug and a bangle and figuring out the purpose behind ancient pieces like a Greek helmet and a bull-shaped vessel. This interactive show, for ages 3 to 10, also includes a recreated room from the Ottoman period (about 1900), where young archaeologists can dress in costume. 1109 Fifth Avenue, at 92nd Street, 212-423-3200, thejewishmuseum.org. Arthur Ashe Kids Day (Saturday) The United States Open isn’t just for grown-ups. At this 20th annual pretournament celebration, which honors the legacy of the tennis champion and social activist Arthur Ashe, children can get into the swing of things with tennis clinics and athletic activities, as well as performances by up-and-coming musicians. The highlights of the free morning festival, from 9:30 a.m. to 12:30 p.m., include target-hitting stations; the Hess Toy Truck Obstacle Course, where children can test their agility and running skills; the IBM Speedzone, which uses technology to measure the power of their tennis shots; and YouthTennis.com, which features a method of introducing young players to the game with specialized equipment and smaller courts. The day continues with a ticketed (not free) stadium show of tennis matches and professional music acts — the performers include Natalie La Rose, Jacob Whitesides and the Brooklyn group American Authors — from 1 to 3 p.m. At the United States Tennis Association Billie Jean King National Tennis Center, Flushing Meadows-Corona Park, Queens, 866-673-6849, aakd.com. ‘Brooklyn Sewers: What’s Up Down There?’ (Friday through Sunday, and Wednesday and Thursday) When it comes to subterranean infrastructure projects, New York City’s subway system seems to get all the attention. But a group of teenage curators at the Brooklyn Historical Society would like to introduce you to another underground marvel: Brooklyn’s sewer system, one of the city’s oldest and most extensive infrastructure projects. This exhibition explores engineering conundrums and courtroom battles and tells the story of the sewer system through photographs, drawings and maps. (Through May 29.) 128 Pierrepont Street, near Clinton Street, Brooklyn Heights, 718-222-4111, brooklynhistory.org. Children’s Museum of the Arts Free Art Island Outpost (Saturday and Sunday) This island fun doesn’t require a flight to distant shores. The Children’s Museum of the Arts is offering another summer of free weekend workshops on Governors Island, exploring a variety of crafts and materials. This season’s programs will be devoted to making works that reflect the importance of nature and parks, and the human role in both. Children will also recycle and reuse something that often blights nature — trash — by turning it into art. (Through Sept. 27.) From 11 a.m. to 3 p.m., outside Building 14, Nolan Park, 212-274-0986, cmany.org/schoolsandcommunity/free-summer-programs. Collaborative Map Project (Friday through Monday) The Children’s Museum of the Arts is inviting young visitors to go globe-trotting — using their fingers — in this group workshop, which heralds the museum’s forthcoming show “If You Lived Here, You’d Be Home,” an exploration of the intersection of cartography and art. Children will work together to create a mural-size world map, first outlining and then filling in details with collage materials. Inspired by the book “Maps,” by Aleksandra and Daniel Mizielinska, the project will include introducing flora, fauna and spots of special interest to the map. Friday from noon to 6 p.m.; Saturday and Sunday from 10 a.m. to 5 p.m.; Monday from noon to 5 p.m.; 103 Charlton Street, between Hudson and Greenwich Streets, South Village, 212-274-0986, cmany.org. ‘Connected Worlds’ (Friday through Thursday) Human choices and actions have an impact on the world’s ecosystems, but people usually can’t see the effects as they happen. That isn’t true in this new permanent exhibition in the renovated Great Hall of the New York Hall of Science. Consisting of huge screens (one is 38 feet tall), the show depicts six interconnected environments with a shared water supply. With the help of technology that responds to gestures, “Connected Worlds” allows children to use simple motions to plant, harvest, cut trees, create clouds and make other changes in the projected landscapes — and see how the native flora and fauna fare. 47-01 111th Street, Flushing Meadows-Corona Park, Queens, 718-699-0005, nysci.org. Field Station: Dinosaurs (Friday through Sunday, and Tuesday through Thursday) Just as a Tyrannosaurus rex, velociraptors and other prehistoric creatures have thundered into movie theaters, they’re heading out of New Jersey. Field Station: Dinosaurs, the 20-acre theme park filled with more than 30 animatronic species — including a T. rex, a stegosaurus and a 90-foot-long Argentinosaurus — is losing its Secaucus home and is looking for another site. But the dinosaurs, which move when approached, are in residence for one final summer, and there’s still time to catch the attractions, which include a three-quarter-mile trail with other paleontology exhibits; a movie, “Walking with Dinosaurs: Prehistoric Planet 3D”; and Paleontologists’ Laboratory, a recent addition that allows young visitors to dig for fossils and take home a small bag of genuine artifacts. (Through Sept. 7.) At 1 Dinosaur Way (off Exit 15X of the New Jersey Turnpike), Laurel Hill Park, Secaucus, N.J., 855-999-9010, fieldstationdinosaurs.com. Fishing Clinics (Saturday and Sunday) Fishing tends to be enjoyable for almost everyone but the fish. Yet the species involved here can’t complain too much: They are all returned live to Prospect Park Lake in Brooklyn. Open to eager anglers 15 and younger, these annual free summer clinics, ending this weekend, are part of the Pop-Up Audubon series. They involve not only fishing and safety instruction, but also an introduction to aquatic ecology. All equipment is provided, but supplies are limited. At 1 and 3 p.m., first come first served, at two locations in Prospect Park: the Peninsula, reachable from the Vanderbilt Street entrance, where Macy’s Fishing Clinics are offered, and White Levy Esplanade at Lakeside, reachable from the Parkside Avenue and Ocean Avenue entrance, where the Prospect Park Alliance operates the program. 718-287-3400, prospectpark.org/pop-up-audubon. ‘Frida’s Flora and Fauna’ and ‘Cooking With Frida’ (Friday through Sunday, and Tuesday through Thursday) It’s time to say “Olé!” to all kinds of fun: The New York Botanical Garden is honoring the Mexican artist Frida Kahlo (1907-1954) in its exhibition “Frida Kahlo: Art, Garden, Life,” and it offers more than one program to introduce its youngest visitors to this famous Latina. In “Frida’s Flora and Fauna,” through Sept. 27 at the Everett Children’s Adventure Garden, they can go on a plant scavenger hunt; make self-portraits, as Kahlo often did; play inside la Casíta Azul, a model of her blue house; and put on shows at Frida’s Puppet Theater, with puppets representing her many pets. In “Cooking With Frida,” at the Ruth Rea Howell Family Garden through Nov. 1, children can explore the raw ingredients of Mexican cuisine and enjoy cooking demonstrations inspired by Kahlo’s entertaining. “Frida’s Flora and Fauna” runs weekdays from 1:30 to 5:30 p.m., and weekends from 10 a.m. to 5:30 p.m.; “Cooking With Frida” is on Wednesdays, Saturdays and Sundays at 2 and 4 p.m.; Bronx River Parkway (Exit 7W) and Fordham Road, the Bronx, 718-817-8700, nybg.org/frida. FringeJR and FringeHIGH (Friday through Sunday) The New York International Fringe Festival, ending this weekend, has always worked to nurture a new generation of theatergoers with offerings that have the same offbeat and occasionally outrageous sensibility as the festival’s grown-up shows. This year’s FringeJR division offered six productions for ages 12 and under, of which four are still playing. One is a revised fairy tale, “Rapunzel in the Wild West” (Friday), a musical whose title explains it. “Haunted Holliot Hildorf Hotel and Shadow’s Unicycle” (Saturday and Sunday) features child actors in two supernatural tales whose characters include an 8-year-old ghost hunter and pajama-clad zombies. “Ideas, Not Theories” (Saturday) explores the world of percussion, whose instruments here include water, bicycles and the human body. “Pedro Pan” (Friday), which centers on a boy sent to the United States from Havana in 1962, draws inspiration from the real Operacíon Pedro Pan. And for teenagers eager for challenging fare, there’s FringeHIGH, whose productions deal with subjects like street violence, illegal immigration, relations between minorities and police officers, and the Armenian genocide. Full schedule, locations, details and tickets are at fringenyc.org, and from 2 to 8 p.m. daily at FringeCentral, at City Lore, 56 East First Street, East Village. ‘Frolic!’ at the Children’s Museum of Manhattan (Friday through Thursday) You’re never too young to rock — and this space proves it. A new pop-up installation at the museum, “Frolic!” uses rock music and a themed décor to stimulate sensory play and learning in visitors ages 5 and under. In addition to a stage, a pretend ticket booth and ’70s-style props — including a Volkswagen mini-van to climb into — the 1,500-square-foot area has programs of workshops and live performances to help little ones get into the groove. (Through Dec. 31.) The Tisch Building, 212 West 83rd Street, 212-721-1223, cmom.org. ‘From Selma to the Black Panthers: Family Conversations in the Gallery’ (Saturday) The Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. and the Black Panther Bobby Seale both sought civil rights for African-Americans, but their views of the appropriate means for attaining that goal differed greatly. In this program at the DiMenna Children’s History Museum of the New-York Historical Society, ending this weekend, young visitors can reflect on the material presented in the exhibitions “Freedom Journey 1965: Photographs of the Selma to Montgomery March by Stephen Somerstein” and “Art as Activism.” Geared to older children, the program will discuss how the civil rights movement evolved from Dr. King’s espousal of nonviolent protest to the Black Panthers’ advocacy of armed resistance. It is also intended to provide a context for understanding how the struggle for civil rights continues today. At 12:30 p.m., 170 Central Park West, at 77th Street, 212-873-3400, nyhistory.org/childrens-museum. ‘The Gazillion Bubble Show: The Next Generation’ (Friday through Sunday, and Thursday) Children love bubbles, and this interactive show promises not just a gazillion but also some of the largest ever blown, along with light effects and lasers. The stars are the members of the Yang family: Fan and Ana Yang and their son Deni and others, who rotate as M.C.s for the production. Audience members may even find themselves in bubbles of their own. (The run is open-ended.) Friday at 7 p.m.; Saturday at 11 a.m. and 2 and 4:30 p.m.; Sunday at noon and 3 p.m.; Thursday at 11 a.m. and 2 p.m.; 340 West 50th Street, Clinton, 212-239-6200, gazillionbubbleshow.com. ‘Goldilocks & the 3 Bears’ (Saturday and Sunday) Yes, it’s that unwelcome blond visitor again, stirring things up at the bears’ house and trying out chairs, bowls of porridge and beds. Robert Southey’s folk tale is told in an updated version by Jack Kaplan, with hand puppets by Nicolas Coppola, artistic director of Puppetworks. At 12:30 and 2:30 p.m., Puppetworks, 338 Sixth Avenue, at Fourth Street, Park Slope, Brooklyn, 718-965-3391, puppetworks.org. Reservations advised. Hampton Classic Horse Show Optimum Kids Day (Saturday) It’s hard to know who will do more jumping at this event: the horses in competition or the excited children. This one-day festival, part of the 40th annual Hampton Classic Horse Show, will include a free pony ride for each child under 12; a presentation of birds of prey; a petting zoo; performances by the Bellini Family Circus; and magic shows from the Amazing Zola, as well as face painting, music and crafts. Little fans can also attend equestrian show events. From 10 a.m. to 2 p.m., 240 Snake Hollow Road, Bridgehampton, N.Y., 631-537-3177, hamptonclassic.com. Hands-On Nano Demos (Saturday) Forget about thinking big; this free event is all about thinking small, as Sony Wonder Technology Lab offers experiments and workshops exploring the properties, structures and materials involved in nanotechnology. Recommended for ages 6 and older, these demonstrations are enhanced by the lab’s permanent exhibit on nanotechnology’s applications in fields like medicine, transportation and fashion. From 1 to 3 p.m., 550 Madison Avenue, at 56th Street, Manhattan, 212-833-8100, sonywondertechlab.com. Hot Peas ‘N Butter (Saturday and Sunday) This serving is the kind that will please musical appetites. A band often seen on Nickelodeon and Noggin, Hot Peas ‘N Butter offers a blend of Latin tunes, Afro-Caribbean rhythms, jazz, folk and rock, sung bilingually and all intended to get children on their feet and dancing. These appearances at the Bronx Zoo will celebrate the group’s new album, “Put Our Heads Together,” to be released in September. At 12:30, 2 and 3:30 p.m., Bronx River Parkway and Fordham Road, Fordham, 718-367-1010, bronxzoo.com. ‘The Hunger Games: The Exhibition’ (Friday through Thursday) What enterprising 12- or 13-year-old wouldn’t like to foment a little rebellion? Such a visitor can do so vicariously at this new attraction at Discovery Times Square, stepping into the role of Katniss Everdeen, the teenage heroine of “The Hunger Games” and the ultimate leader of the resistance against her nation’s totalitarian government. Based on the Lionsgate film adaptations of Suzanne Collins’s novels, the show includes costumes and artifacts from the movies, as well as re-creations of Katniss’s journey and interactive, role-playing elements like a gamesmaker’s table and a chance to learn and practice stunt choreography. (Through Jan. 3.) 226 West 44th Street, Manhattan, 866-987-9692, discoverytsx.com, thehungergamesexhibition.com. ‘Jack and the Beanstalk’ (Friday through Sunday) Many plants grow in Central Park, so why not a beanstalk? This one sprouts indoors at the Swedish Cottage Marionette Theater, which has revived Michael Alogna’s adaptation of the classic fairy tale about Jack, the Giant (here named Milford), Dolly the Cow and the famous Golden Goose. Bruce Cannon, the theater’s artistic director, has revised the script, and a human actor now stars in the show along with the company’s hand-built marionettes. Friday at 10:30 a.m. and noon; Saturday and Sunday at 1 p.m. (The show then goes on hiatus until Sept. 12.) Reservations required. 79th Street and the West Drive, Central Park; 212-988-9093, cityparksfoundation.org/arts. ‘Jean-Michel Cousteau’s Secret Ocean’ (Friday through Thursday) Ever encounter a goby or a blenny? How about a Christmas tree worm? These small marine species, often unnoticed and uncelebrated, are among the stars of this new Imax movie at the American Museum of Natural History. Filmed by Jean-Michel Cousteau, son of the ocean explorer Jacques Cousteau, and Holly Lohuis, a marine biologist, the film captures 30 species that are among the tiniest to inhabit the seas. (Through Jan. 10.) Hourly from 10:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m., with 2-D screenings at 11:30 a.m. and 4:30 p.m.; all other screenings are 3-D. Central Park West and 79th Street, 212-769-5200, amnh.org. ‘The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe’ (Saturday) If the children of the Pevensie family could travel to the magical land of Narnia through something as simple as a wardrobe, why shouldn’t two hard-working actors be able to play them and all the characters found there? That’s what Chris Boerner and Erin Layton, who recently stepped into the roles, are attempting in the Off Broadway Family Theater’s first production, le Clanché du Rand’s adaptation of C. S. Lewis’s classic novel. (The run is open-ended and continues on Saturdays.) At 11 a.m., St. Luke’s Theater, 308 West 46th Street, Clinton, 212-239-6200, narniaoffbroadway.com. Living History Weekends (Saturday and Sunday) How often do you get to take a selfie with a Revolutionary War soldier? Opportunities abound at the New-York Historical Society, whose Living History Weekends, free for ages 18 and under, welcome costumed re-enactors to the society’s DiMenna Children’s History Museum. This is the final weekend, when re-enactors will portray members of the Third New Jersey Regiment, who will teach how to handle their 18th-century-style equipment. Visitors can also learn about how women and children coped with the war. From 11 a.m. to 4 p.m., 170 Central Park West, at 77th Street, 212-873-3400, nyhistory.org. MoMA Art Lab: Places and Spaces (Friday through Monday) What’s an art lab? These interactive spaces for children at the Museum of Modern Art, free with museum admission, help introduce the institution’s collection through activities related to a theme: this time it’s Places and Spaces. In the lab, which ends on Monday, young visitors can design, draw and build as they explore spaces both real and imagined — landscapes, cityscapes, seascapes — as they appear in Modern art. The Lewis B. and Dorothy Cullman Education and Research Building, 4 West 54th Street, Manhattan; 212-708-9805, moma.org/momaartlab. Music in Motion (Saturday) That motion is the gentle rocking of a boat for this series of family neighborhood concerts presented by Bargemusic, the floating barge at the foot of the Brooklyn Bridge. As always, the material — announced just before the performance — is chamber music, but these programs differ in important ways from the regular Bargemusic fare: With unreserved seating, they last only an hour, include a post-show question-and-answer session with the musicians and are all free. (Through Nov. 28.) At 4 p.m. (doors open at 3:45), Fulton Ferry Landing, next to the Brooklyn Bridge, Brooklyn, 800-838-3006, bargemusic.org. ‘Pattern Wizardry’ (Friday through Sunday) You don’t have to enroll at Hogwarts to experience the fun of being a sorcerer’s apprentice. These days the Brooklyn Children’s Museum is providing the flowing capes and lots of instruction. Best of all, the magic is real. It’s at “Pattern Wizardry,” an exhibition that teaches that the complex universe isn’t really random. The world is based on patterns, and the show invites children to investigate examples from nature, science, culture and art. (Through Sept. 6.) 145 Brooklyn Avenue, at St. Marks Avenue, Crown Heights, 718-735-4400, brooklynkids.org. ‘Pinkalicious, the Musical’ (Saturday and Sunday) That rosy little girl is about to leave. This long-running production of Elizabeth and Victoria Kann’s adaptation of their children’s book, from Vital Theater Company, closes this weekend at Culture Project. The pink-obsessed title character finds out that sometimes being in the pink can be too much of a good thing — especially when eating too many pink cupcakes turns her pink from head to toe. John Gregor wrote the score and some of the lyrics. At 1 p.m., Lynn Redgrave Theater, 45 Bleecker Street, near Lafayette Street, East Village, 212-579-0528, vitaltheatre.org. ‘Sketching in the Galleries: The Hirschfeld Century’ (Sunday) Children love discovering something hidden, and the work of the artist Al Hirschfeld offers a ready-made game. After his daughter, Nina, was born in 1945, he hid her name at least once in most of his caricatures. In this program at the DiMenna Children’s History Museum of the New-York Historical Society, young visitors 6 and older will explore the exhibition “The Hirschfeld Century: The Art of Al Hirschfeld” and then work with paper templates that feature just the outlines of some of his pieces. They can fill in their own lines and details and, if they like, conceal the name of a loved one as well. At 12:30 p.m., 170 Central Park West, at 77th Street, 212-873-3400, nyhistory.org/childrens-museum. Stories at the Statue of Hans Christian Andersen (Saturday) Not everything that blooms perennially in Central Park is a flower or a tree. Storytelling also returns there each summer, as the city’s Parks and Recreation Department, the Central Park Conservancy and the Hans Christian Andersen Storytelling Center bring narrative performers to Andersen’s statue every Saturday. The free series, for ages 6 and older, continues this Saturday with LuAnn Adams and Judith Heineman telling telling tales from Egypt and Japan. (Through Sept. 26.) At 11 a.m., inside the park at 72nd Street and Fifth Avenue, rain or shine, hcastorycenter.org. Summer Sports Jamboree (Friday) It will soon be time to hit the books, but the Department of Parks and Recreation is providing a great opportunity to hit the fields first. This jamboree, geared to ages 6 through 17, welcomes young people to take part in the most popular activities the department includes in its Summer Sports Experience program, which helps develop athletic skills. This free event will offer baseball, basketball, football, lacrosse, soccer, tennis, track and field and volleyball, along with prizes, snacks and a D.J. Those who don’t play can enjoy arts and crafts, face painting and, of course, watching. From 11 a.m. to 3 p.m., Williamsbridge Oval Recreation Center, 3225 Reservoir Oval East, near Bainbridge Avenue, Norwood, the Bronx, 212-360-3303, nycgovparks.org/events/kids. Sunday Story Time in Mr. Morgan’s Library (Sunday) That Mr. Morgan is none other than Pierpont (1837-1913), whose library is now a cozy museum. Children ages 3 through 6 are invited there every Sunday through Oct. 11 to hear about Alice’s amazing trip to Wonderland and what she found there. The program relates to the museum’s show “Alice: 150 Years of Wonderland,” which includes the book’s original manuscript, along with illustrations and other vintage objects that young visitors can see in a brief visit after the story. (Through Oct. 11.) From 3 to 4 p.m., 225 Madison Avenue, at 36th Street, 212-685-0008, themorgan.org. ‘A Taste of Magic’ (Friday) Would you like a side of sleight of hand with that burger? This show, developed by Magnets, a collective of local magicians, brings wizardry to the dinner table. Taking place at various restaurants, the presentation includes acts like mind reading and card tricks, which professionals perform close-up for guests; there’s also a cabaret-style show. And the admission price includes a full meal. (Through Nov. 24.) At 8 p.m., Ben & Jack’s Steakhouse, 225 Fifth Avenue, between 28th and 29th Streets, atasteofmagicnyc.com. ‘A Voyage Through Jewish History’ (Sunday through Thursday) This journey involves not just miles, but years. In this permanent interactive exhibition at the Jewish Children’s Museum, young visitors can travel from Abraham and Sarah’s tent to the Western Wall in contemporary Jerusalem and beyond. Activities along the way include giving water to Rebecca’s camels, playing the strings on David’s harp (a high-tech version with beams of light that emit sounds when struck) and taking part in the exodus from Egypt. On Sunday and Sept. 6, at 1 and 3 p.m., in preparation for Rosh Hashana, young visitors can take part in a workshop to make a model shofar, the ram’s horn that’s blown to announce the new year. The museum also offers “Summer Safety 3,” an installation through Thursday that uses a special course to teach children how to avoid pedestrian dangers. 792 Eastern Parkway, at Kingston Avenue, Crown Heights, Brooklyn, 718-907-8833, jcm.museum. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page C 16 of the New York edition with the headline: Spare Times: For Children . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              