   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Subscribe Log In Image Terrance Hayes recording one of his poems at the Museum of Modern Art on March 12. Credit Larry Fink for The New York Times Galaxies Inside His Head Terrance Hayes uses poetry to show that there is more to him, and to anyone, than what you expect. Terrance Hayes recording one of his poems at the Museum of Modern Art on March 12. Credit Larry Fink for The New York Times Supported by By  Stephen Burt March 24, 2015 F ifty students sat at bright white desks in concentric rows in the sterile new computer center at Woodland Hills High School, their eyes on the poet Terrance Hayes . At 6-foot-5, Hayes, who is 43, is easy to see from anywhere, and he seemed eminently approachable, neither teacher nor teen: bluejeans, a black sweater, a leather cellphone case clipped to his belt. He had come to the school, in a racially mixed district that serves several disadvantaged communities in Pittsburgh, to read poetry. The students — Goths, hip-hop fans in giant sweatshirts and jocks in sports jerseys — grew quiet, ready to listen. But Hayes didn’t start out with his poems. Instead, he talked about how he came to write them: How he got from his native Columbia, S.C., to graduate study at the University of Pittsburgh; how his poems react to film (“Lady Sings the Blues”), to news (a Chicago gang murder from 1994), to music (Kendrick Lamar), to family history; and how he assembled some of those poems into books, from his first, “Muscular Music” (published in 1999), to his most recent, “How to Be Drawn” (which will be published this month). Hayes has read at Carnegie Hall and the Library of Congress and edited the annual Best American Poetry, whose previous volumes included his work seven times. He won a National Book Award in 2010 for the collection “Lighthead” and, last year, a MacArthur Foundation “genius” grant . In 2014, People magazine named Hayes among its candidates for Sexiest Man Alive. (“I didn’t think anyone would see it,” he told me, with characteristic understatedness.) The poet Shara McCallum, a friend of Hayes’s, said, “ ‘Famous poet’ seems like an oxymoron, but Terrance seems to deliver something for a lot of people.” When she saw him at a crowded writer’s convention two years ago, she said, “it was like groupies with Mick Jagger.” With close-cropped hair in place of his former mohawk, Hayes has the physical ease of the basketball player he once was, the athlete’s bodily awareness that John McPhee called “a sense of where you are.” When reading verse, Hayes stood still, with squared shoulders, but when he talked about the poems, he leaned forward, his arms folded over the lectern, pointing at students and to a slide show he had prepared, projected on a screen behind him. Before reading his poem “Lady Sings the Blues,” he played an audio clip of Billie Holiday singing “Good Morning, Heartache.” (“Good morning, heartache, here we go again/Good morning, heartache, you’re the one who knew me when.”) The students watched, their faces blank. The song was plainly unfamiliar. “Does it really matter that you know this stuff?” he asked. None of them ventured an answer. A few gazed down, perhaps checking cellphones. But many were still paying attention when he began talking about things they did know: Pittsburgh and hip-hop. “I hung out with a lot of hip-hop guys in grad school,” he said. “They would say, ‘Why you got your book — just come onstage!’ ” In response, he wrote his own hip-hop performance poem, “Ballad of Bullethead,” which begins, “I was born in metal/— my mother’s kettle/My father peddled/So we settled alone.” When he read it aloud, the students broke into applause. “You find art everywhere,” he said, before reading what he called “my only basketball poem,” “Talk,” from 2006, in which a black student reacts to a racist comment made by a white teammate. The poem begins in a middle-school locker room: “Talk/like a nigger now, my white friend, M, said.” The students gasped at the opening line. “A poem is never about one thing,” he told them. “You want it to be as complicated as your feelings.” He played a clip of the brooding jazz-rap hit “His Pain,” by BJ the Chicago Kid, featuring Kendrick Lamar, with its melancholy refrain “I don’t know why You keep blessing me.” The students knew the song. Hayes then read a new poem, “The Carpenter Ant,” about a troubled relative; its stanzas paraphrase “His Pain.” She “took her hammer with its claw like a mandible/to her own handmade housing humming,/‘I don’t know why God keeps blessing me.’ ” “I’m not really a poetry person,” an 11th grader, Hannah Rauenzahn, told me afterward. “But I really want to read that kind of stuff now.” When Hayes asked for questions, the students’ hands shot up. To be a poet, do you have to write in traditional poetic forms? Do you have to write in iambic pentameter? “If you can breakdance, that’s cool,” Hayes answered. “If you can breakdance in a straitjacket, that’s even better.” Hayes told me that had he not received a basketball scholarship for college, he might have followed his mother, Ethel, and become a prison guard. “I would have hoped to have done something else,” he said. “Corrections seemed like the easiest option. That or the military.” His mother had Hayes at 16; his biological father was not in the picture. When Hayes was a toddler, Ethel met and married James Hayes, a career Army man. When Hayes refers to his father, he means James; his poem “The Same City” compares James Hayes to the New Testament Joseph, “raising a son that wasn’t his.” In 1980 the Hayes family settled in Folkstone, an African-American neighborhood 12 miles from downtown Columbia, S.C. James II, Hayes’s younger brother, called Folkstone “a Utopia of youth,” with places to play outdoors, no gangs and no night life. “My parents would have had me believe/there was no such thing as race/there in the wild backyard,” Hayes writes in the poem “Root.” At his mostly white, preppy high school, Hayes’s friends knew him as a serious student, a basketball player and a painter; few knew that he also wrote poems. Hayes attended Coker College in Hartsville, S.C., and played power forward for Dan Schmotzer, who is still the men’s basketball coach there. Schmotzer told me that Hayes was highly recruited in South Carolina because he was such a good student, but he underperformed on the court for most of his time because he refused to wear corrective goggles. (“Thick, ugly goggles,” Schmotzer adds, “Kareem Abdul-Jabbar goggles.”) Senior year, Hayes changed his mind, wore the goggles and tore up the conference. That year, he also switched his major from studio art to English. The English faculty had been quietly admiring Hayes’s work for years, sharing his poems with one another. One professor, John French, encouraged Hayes to apply to graduate schools in writing. That year, 1994, the poet Toi Derricotte, who taught at the University of Pittsburgh, gave a reading at a college half an hour away. Hayes drove there, met her and decided that the M.F.A. program at Pitt was his first choice. From the small world of Coker, where he was a star, Hayes became a young Southern man in a big, cold, Northern city, as well as “the only black man in the graduate program,” Derricotte recalls. “He probably felt pretty alone.” Asked to describe his own feelings back then, Hayes — who, in our conversations, rarely admitted directly to a negative emotion — simply deferred to Derricotte. “Toi would know,” he said. “When she says things, I trust that, because she would have seen me better than I could have seen myself.” Derricotte, along with the poet Cornelius Eady, was then organizing Cave Canem, a series of retreats and network-building activities for black poets. Along with the Dark Room Collective in Boston, Cave Canem would become a major incubator for the current renaissance in black poetry, which includes the poets Tracy K. Smith, who won the 2012 Pulitzer Prize in poetry; Afaa Michael Weaver, who won the Kingsley Tufts prize last year; and, most recently, Claudia Rankine, who won the National Book Critics Circle Award for poetry this year. Hayes worked at Cave Canem and attended the retreats and poetry workshops from 1996 until 2002. The poet Elizabeth Alexander, who teaches at Yale, remembers that Hayes was “an assistant, Xeroxing people’s poems,” with a low-key demeanor that belied the “intricate galaxies inside his head.” On the last night of the first weeklong retreat, in June 1996, at a monastery on the Hudson River, the poets formed a circle. Hayes began to cry. “He said the reason he was crying was that it was the first time he could ever walk around without his defenses on,” Derricotte says. “When he said that, everybody started breaking down.” It was an unusual moment for him. “I wouldn’t say that I’m the person who ever breaks down like that; that’s not how I roll,” Hayes said. “That’s why Toi remembers it.” But the people in that circle made him realize that he belonged. “I hadn’t had this kind of family before,” he said. That first Cave Canem retreat also introduced Hayes to Yona Harvey, a poet and the Howard University classmate of a childhood friend. They began exchanging letters and phone calls. Harvey had already decided to teach English in Japan the following summer. “I didn’t think I was going with her,” Hayes told me. But when he saw her again at another writers’ conference, in April, he had started to envision, and reject, the idea of a life without her. They had been together a month when he proposed. Image Terrance Hayes Credit Larry Fink for The New York Times I met Harvey for tea near the University of Pittsburgh campus where they both teach. Petite and confident, with a white streak at the front of her close-cut black curls, she can be equally effusive about the couple’s omnivorous taste in music (Flying Lotus, Burial, Sufjan Stevens, Nina Simone), about Hayes’s writing and about her own (her first book, “Hemming the Water,” was published in 2013). Harvey describes the year after their wedding as “marriage boot camp.” Hayes felt isolated by his height as well as his skin color. “He had trouble in his body, moving around Japan,” Harvey said. But they liked traveling around the islands, taking in Japanese soul, pop and jazz. Their daughter Ua (pronounced Oo-Ah) was born in 1999; they named her after the Japanese R&B-pop singer Kaori Hasegawa, who took the Swahili word for flower as her stage name. They moved to Pittsburgh in 2001, when Hayes received a job offer from Carnegie Mellon. Hayes invited me to dinner at their three-story, yellow brick house a short drive from the Pitt campus, where they’ve lived since their son, Aaron, was born in 2003. A dozen gentle stairs and a porch with three square columns set the house off from the residential street. We sat at a table in a warm, modern kitchen while their squat pug, Fetch, implored the poet (successfully) for treats. Ua came home from her basketball game soon after I arrived; she told Hayes that her team won their away game, despite a hostile crowd. “You all 5-1 now?” he asked. “You’re in a good mood.” She nodded. Over takeout short-rib burgers from the Belgian restaurant Park Bruges, Hayes and I talked about his work. “My early books were obsessed with who my father was,” he said. It was a question he began to address in graduate school, although he didn’t meet his biological father, Earthell Tyler, who is known as Butch, until he was 33. (They have seen each other only a couple of times.) All of Hayes’s books have poems about fathers and fatherhood, along with poems about aggressive, violent or absurdly macho role models. “My daddies have voices/like bachelors, like castigators & crooners,” he writes in “Hip Logic.” “Each of my daddies asks, ‘Are you writing/another poem about me?’ ” In recent years, Hayes said, he wanted to move on. “I was thinking, I can’t write 12 books about who’s my daddy,” he told me. He has tried to redirect his focus to women, but often finds himself drifting back. A new poem, “ How to Draw a Perfect Circle ,” begins with a female figure, but quickly shifts to men: a stranger near a railroad underpass, a transit cop, Odysseus. “He comes from a very male-dominated, hetero family,” Harvey said. “I tease him sometimes. I say, ‘You don’t know anything about women,’ and he’ll say, ‘It’s true.’ ” Hayes’s first collection, “Muscular Music,” won multiple prizes, among them the Kate Tufts award. “Hip Logic” won the National Poetry Series contest in 2001. It also brought Hayes a rare commitment from a trade publisher, Penguin, which brought out the well-received “Wind in a Box” in 2006. That year, the poet Jason Koo, writing in The Missouri Review, noted, somewhat uncomfortably, Hayes’s ascendance. He had come to represent more than his poems. He was an attractive symbol of integration, an ambassador, an unimpeachable story of black male achievement. “There is a buzz about his name,” Koo wrote. “Many people who have not even read his books or, indeed, any contemporary poetry at all, have heard of him — or claim to have heard of him, so as not to appear uncool. Poets I know who cannot agree on anything agree on ‘liking’ Hayes.” Admirers wanted to embrace what they believed he stood for. Adrian Matejka, a poet who also attended Cave Canem, says that people project aspirations onto Hayes. “He’s kind of a poetic Rorschach,” he wrote me in an email. But Hayes’s poems insist, sometimes bitterly, that there is more to Hayes, and more to anyone, than what you can see or what you expect to see. “People want some sort of affirming narrative,” Hayes said, “as if I was from the ghetto and went to jail and then poetry saved my life.” His new book begins with a poem titled “What It Look Like.” In it, competing stereotypes about African-Americans collide: My uncle used the money I gave him to buy a few vials of what looked like candy after the party where my grandma sang in an outfit that was obviously made for a West African king. My motto is Never mistake what it is for what it looks like. Image “People want some sort of affirming narrative, as if I was from the ghetto and went to jail and then poetry saved my life.” Credit Larry Fink for The New York Times A sonnet from “Hip Logic” mocks the persistence of racial stereotypes by repeating the same line 14 times: “We sliced the watermelon into smiles.” When college students (those I teach at Harvard, for example) read Hayes, they talk about the underlying seriousness of poems about lynchings, fistfights or rape. But when poets talk about Hayes, they tend to address his invented forms: poems based on anagrams, on the Japanese slide shows called pechakucha and on puzzles. Hayes has written poems that speak to, or for, the 1980s TV star Mr. T; the black nationalist poet Amiri Baraka; the segregationist senator (and secret father of a black daughter) Strom Thurmond; the Russian modernist poet and provocateur Vladimir Mayakovsky; and the poet Etheridge Knight, who began writing in prison. His most revealing impersonations, though, invoke chameleonic pop stars like Michael Jackson and David Bowie. His work explores multiple identities and multiple forms of masculinity — how to be, or become, various kinds of men — but it is also an art of evasion: To become a full-time poet, Hayes had to leave a house of prison guards. Hayes works to escape not the African-American identity but the demand that he (or anyone) express that identity in the same way all the time. When Hayes read in South Carolina last month, “a young white girl pretty much accosted me and said, ‘Why do you write so much about being black?’ ” he told me. It wasn’t the first time he was asked. “Because I am black. I’m black, I’m Southern, I’m male, I’m obsessive, I’m weird, I’m half-blind,” he answered. Hayes still paints seriously; all five of his books, including “How to Be Drawn,” feature his paintings on the cover. After his visit to Woodland Hills High School, Hayes had the afternoon free. I wanted to look at art with him, and he suggested the Andy Warhol Museum, an elegant box along the Allegheny River. At the school, he had projected like a stage actor and animated the room. But as we drove to the museum, the chance to speak casually about his life seemed to come as a relief from the pressure of public performance. “As long as I’m writing and working, I can keep it together,” he told me. Harvey had told me that for all her husband’s ease in the spotlight, she thought of him as essentially shy; his characteristic visibility has become, for him, a constant labor. “If he could figure out how to disappear, I think he would,” she says. Another new poem, “The Rose Has Teeth,” declares, “I wanted to be invisible,” and continues: “I was trying to play/like a woman blacker than an unpaid light bill,/like a white boy lost in the snow.” The Warhol Museum itself makes a strange kind of argument: It’s built around the work of a man who made his art out of publicity. As we walked, Hayes noted the clean lines of Warhol’s early sketches and canvases, but the closer we got to the work that made the artist famous, the less attention we paid to it. Instead, we talked about the shape of a poet’s career. “With popularity, it gets harder to know if people take you seriously,” he said. “I’m a person who never really wants to have his door closed. I want to have it open and see who’s going to come in.” But lately, “more and more people at the door,” he said, “care about me but not about poetry.” People often ask him what it means to be a spokesman for poetry. The question seems to make him uncomfortable. He told me that he usually answers by talking about an interview he conducted two years ago with the rapper and producer RZA of the Wu-Tang Clan. “Not that he was representing hip-hop or black people or that he was from New York, it was that he was RZA, that he was so at home in himself,” he said. “I’m just interested in being present, not in being representative of anything.” And yet he accepts this role of ambassador, constructing that elaborate slide-show presentation that he has taken not only to high school classes but also to a senior center and a juvenile-detention facility. That day at Woodland Hills, the students swarmed Hayes after his talk. The A.P. English teacher, Lisa Silverman, praised his work in multiple traditions, in conventional poetry and spoken word, Shakespeare and hip-hop. But she couldn’t help saying that Hayes stood for something more. “He’s the Langston Hughes of their generation,” she told me, before turning to Hayes to tell him that he set a good example. “You are definitely comfortable in your manhood,” she said. As Hayes took questions from students, he tried patiently to draw fine distinctions, leading the students back from broad notions of film, song and poetry to particular poems and lines. He described his discomfort when a white guy he met in the Hamptons assumed, hearing he was a poet, that he must “do spoken word.” And he took his time, even with queries like “Kobe or LeBron?” (LeBron.) One student wanted to know whether Hayes’s poetry still drew on hip-hop. On art? On poverty? On spoken word? On Shakespeare? “Using your style,” asked a quiet blond girl, “can you write a poem about anything?” He smiled. To that question, Hayes had a quick answer. “Yes.” Stephen Burt is a literary critic and professor of English at Harvard.  Sign up for our newsletter to get the best of The New York Times Magazine delivered to your inbox every week. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page 32 of the Sunday Magazine with the headline: Galaxies Inside His Head . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Related Coverage The Unbreakable Laura Hillenbrand Dec. 18, 2014 Image The Revelations of Marilynne Robinson Oct. 1, 2014 Image Donald Antrim and the Art of Anxiety Sept. 17, 2014 Image Show All Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              