   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Sports Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Little League Softball Scandal Ends in Elimination for the Accused Image Alpenrose Dairy Field in Portland, Ore., has hosted the the Little League Softball World Series for several years. Credit Jonathan Ferrey/Getty Images By  Victor Mather Aug. 18, 2015 A girls softball team accused of intentionally losing at the Little League World Series was eliminated on Tuesday after being ordered to play a special play-in game. The team from Snohomish, Wash., lost the game, 3-2, to a team from Polk City, Iowa, which had been the victim of the alleged game-fixing. In the controversial game on Monday, Washington benched its best players and frequently bunted, even with two strikes. It lost the game to a team from Salisbury, N.C., 8-0, in a no-hitter. The game did not matter to Washington, which had already advanced to the next round. But it did send North Carolina to the semifinals at the expense of Iowa. “It’s clear to everyone that they basically threw the game,” Coach Chris Chadd of Iowa told The Des Moines Register . It was not immediately clear why Washington might prefer North Carolina to advance rather than Iowa. Washington had beaten Iowa by only one run in preliminary play, and might have wanted to avoid facing it again, Chadd suggested. Little League organizers said the reports of cheating were “credible” and ordered that Washington play the special play-in game against Iowa, with the winner joining North Carolina in the semifinals. “The Little League International Tournament Committee recently received credible reports that some teams did not play with the effort and spirit appropriate for any Little League game,” organizers said in a statement. “Given these circumstances and in order to best determine the second team to advance from Pool B, the Little League International Tournament Committee is requiring that a tiebreaker game be played between the two affected teams – South Snohomish Little League and Central Iowa Little League.” Jeff Taylor, the president of the South Snohomish Little League, acknowledged the team had rested its starters. But he insisted to The Herald of Everett, Wash. : “We made a lot of good plays. We didn’t go up there trying to strike out, like they’re trying to imply. We made a lineup that rested some of our players that had been playing for three months. To try to downplay the accomplishments of these girls is unfair.” The story of 13-year-old girls possibly throwing a game predictably caused a stir. On the Little League Softball World Series Facebook page, more than one commenter celebrated Iowa’s win: “Karma. Served with Iowa fed beef!!! Awesome job girls. They tried to avoid you again for a reason.” Intentionally throwing games for strategic reasons is not unknown in sports. At the 2012 Olympics, four women’s doubles teams in badminton — two from South Korea and one each from China and Indonesia — were disqualified. The players were found to have tried to lose their matches intentionally, in a bid to play a weaker opponent in the next round. In those contests, though, both teams were trying to lose, setting up an almost comic display of intentional futility. Related Coverage Little League Scandal Shows Why Baseball Is Better Viewed From Afar Feb. 11, 2015 Image Olympic Ideal Takes Beating in Badminton Aug. 1, 2012 Image Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              