   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Pro Basketball Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Stars’ Newest Must-Have Item: The Clippers Image Among the serious and not-so-serious suitors for the Clippers are, clockwise from the top left: Sean Combs, David Geffen, Judd Apatow, Don Rickles, Oprah Winfrey, Mindy Kaling, Floyd Mayweather Jr. and Magic Johnson. Credit Photos by Getty Images, Reuters, Associated Press By  Billy Witz and Mary Pilon April 30, 2014 LOS ANGELES — For most of the Clippers’ 30-year tenure in Los Angeles, they have been viewed as a punch line in hightops. And so, a day after the N.B.A. commissioner gave the team’s owner, Donald Sterling, a lifetime ban and recommended that owners vote him out, the conversation about who might replace Mr. Sterling revealed the Clippers to be in a strikingly unfamiliar position: the toast of the town. The prospect of an auction created a frenzy, with hands flying up, playfully and not, for a chance to bid on the most coveted commodity in professional sports, a competitive team in a major market. That means the Clippers, the forgotten franchise of Los Angeles sports, are suddenly the belle of basketball. Oprah Winfrey is interested in forming a powerhouse partnership to buy the team with the Silicon Valley mogul Larry Ellison and the entertainment mogul David Geffen, Winfrey’s spokeswoman said. The billionaire entrepreneur and philanthropist Eli Broad is also interested, according to his spokeswoman. So is the boxer Floyd Mayweather Jr. — along with his rival Oscar De La Hoya. Dr. Dre, an icon of West Coast rap, has expressed interest in the team, as has Sean Combs, who may be an icon of East Coast rap but has caught Clippers fever just the same. “I will always be a Knicks fan,” he said on Twitter, “but I am a business man. #DiddyBuyTheClippers  #NameYourPrice .” The comedian Mindy Kaling said she, too, was interested in buying the Clippers, promising that “the uniforms will be the same but bedazzled.” Of course, many, if not most, of the offers are unlikely to materialize. (No one is waiting for Judd Apatow and Don Rickles to submit an official bid anytime soon, despite Mr. Apatow’s tweet that they were considering it.) It would not be the first time celebrities sought to capitalize on a big story. (Mr. Mayweather just happens to be fighting in Las Vegas on Saturday.) All the attention and adoration may be disorienting for the Clippers, a franchise that for a long time was perhaps the worst in pro sports, a basketball calamity that had two winning seasons in Mr. Sterling’s first 30 years. The Clippers had none of the glamour of the Lakers, who have boasted a flotilla of Hall of Fame superstars playing before crowds studded with name-brand celebrities. But the Clippers’ red-and-blue logo, which once represented futility, has suddenly become a symbol of something very different. The team’s overnight transformation is a classic Hollywood tale: An ugly story becomes a heartwarming one, complete with a (potential) happy ending and, even better, lots of celebrity cameos. There is also the twist that the National Basketball Association’s permanent exile of Mr. Sterling, now the most reviled man in pro sports, could well end with him profiting enormously. A real estate baron widely derided as a slumlord, Mr. Sterling bought the team in 1981, when it was based in San Diego, for $12.7 million. Forbes estimated this year that the team was worth about $575 million — and that was before the Clippers were dominating headlines. The mechanics of how a Clippers sale might work — or even if it will happen — remain unclear. The league’s other 29 owners would have to vote by a three-quarters majority that they wanted Mr. Sterling out of the league, and the timing of that has not been announced. Nevertheless, Rick Caruso, a Los Angeles real estate magnate, said that the team was white-hot and that he expected the bidding to go above the Forbes estimate. (He also said that he was assembling a team to examine a bid.) This is all new terrain for the Clippers. The Clippers and the Lakers play in the same arena, Staples Center, but until recently, their games might as well have been played on another planet. Clippers tickets were sold at a fraction of the price. The team’s celebrity fans were B-listers. The visiting team won more often than not. Image Some Clippers fans already know who they would like to take over their team. Credit Robyn Beck/Agence France-Presse — Getty Images The most recognizable fans of the city’s two basketball teams neatly represent the ethos of their fan bases. As a Lakers fan, Jack Nicholson has a confident nonchalance that says, “Wake me up when the playoffs start,” while Billy Crystal, a Clippers fan, speaks for the tortured, self-deprecating schlubs who spill their sodas at timeouts. One is all swag, the other a running gag. But even before the Sterling scandal upended the basketball world, the teams had essentially traded personalities. The Lakers, troubled by injuries and miscalculations, endured the worst season in their history. The city has spent months grumbling about the Lakers’ ownership dynamic: Jim and Jeanie Buss took over after their father, Jerry, died last year. The team is trying to rebuild around the aging Kobe Bryant, who was limited to six games this season because of injuries. By contrast, the Clippers are ascendant, having posted their third consecutive winning season with a franchise-record 57 victories. They have two of the best and most marketable players in the N.B.A., Chris Paul and Blake Griffin, who play a flashy brand of basketball, heavy on alley-oops and other dunks, that prompted the moniker Lob City. And with Doc Rivers’s arrival, they added a rare coach with championship gravitas. The team has sold out every home game in the last three seasons. “Clearly, it’s a strange dynamic,” said Steve Perrin, the managing editor of a Clippers fan site, ClipsNation.com. “There were many years when it was a proud, quirky thing. I wore a Clippers hat, and people thought, ‘You’re a Clippers fan?’ There was some bemusement. There wasn’t a reason to root for the Clippers.” Now, there is an opportunity to replace one of pro sports’ most notorious owners with something that fans say surely must be better. Baron Davis, a former Clipper who was once heckled by Mr. Sterling for not playing up to a six-year, $65 million contract, said it was important to have an owner who was a minority. Michael Jordan, the owner of the Charlotte Bobcats, and Vivek Ranadive, the leader of the ownership group of the Sacramento Kings, are the only minority owners in the league. “Diversity is important,” Mr. Davis said. “Especially with what happened here.” Most agree that the Clippers have room for enormous growth on the business side. The team’s television deal, which expires in 2016, is nowhere near the 20-year, $3 billion deal the Lakers signed with Time Warner Cable two years ago. Until recently, Mr. Sterling rarely invested aggressively in his team on or off the court. With a sale, the Clippers could receive the sort of bump that the Dodgers did when a loathed owner, Frank McCourt, was forced to sell. The Dodgers were acquired by a financial services magnate whose ownership group included Magic Johnson. “It will be like a breath of fresh air; you just open the door, and this fresh breeze comes through,” said Mychal Thompson, the Lakers’ radio analyst, who once played for them. “But whoever the new owners are, they’re going to have to be really creative with this franchise to be able to compete for the hearts and minds of Lakers fans.” Of course, there would be one surefire way to appeal to Lakers fans — and to write a storybook ending to the Sterling scandal. Enter Mr. Johnson, the Lakers Hall of Famer who is revered for his charisma and business acumen, particularly for his efforts in African-American neighborhoods. Mr. Johnson was dragged into the scandal when Mr. Sterling asked a woman he was often seen with not to post online pictures of herself with black men, including one in which she posed with Mr. Johnson. “Don’t put him on Instagram for the world to see so they have to call me,” Mr. Sterling said in a recording released by TMZ. “And don’t bring him to my games. Yeah, it bothers me a lot that you want to promo, broadcast, that you’re associating with black people. Do you have to?” Mr. Johnson has denied a report that said he was interested in joining a group to buy the Clippers, but that has not stopped Los Angeles from talking about it. “If you want the Hollywood ending to all this,” said Mr. Perrin, the Clippers blogger, “it’s Magic Johnson.” Billy Witz reported from Los Angeles, and Mary Pilon from New York.  A version of this article appears in print on , on Page A 1 of the New York edition with the headline: Stars’ Newest Must-Have Item: The Clippers . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Related Coverage Commissioner Sees Basis for Ousting Clippers’ Owner April 29, 2014 Image For Clippers, Transition in Decision Making Begins April 29, 2014 Image video Times Minute | Clippers Owner Banned April 30, 2014 Image Show All Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              