   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index The Learning Network Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Current Events Conversation School Shootings, Super Bowl, the Tide Pod Challenge: Our Favorite Student Comments of the Week Image Students and local residents in Paducah, Ky., held hands in prayer on Jan. 24 for the victims of the mass shooting at Marshall County High School in nearby Benton. Related Article Credit Ryan Hermens/The Paducah Sun, via Associated Press By  The Learning Network Feb. 1, 2018 In their comments this week, students weighed in on a variety of topics ranging from diversity in Hollywood and the “Tide pod challenge” to the Super Bowl and dealing with grief. But the issue that received the most number of comments was school shootings, and in particular, the question of whether we are becoming “numb” to them. As always, we were informed, impressed and entertained by student comments on our writing prompts from around the country and the world. This week we want to especially note the students of Vancouver, Wash.; Wilmington, N.C.; Danvers, Mass.; and King of Prussia, Pa. We also want to recognize the many students from Philadelphia who commented on our Article of the Day about this year’s especially dangerous flu season . Teachers, if your students regularly post to our writing prompts and are sometimes called out here, we’d love to hear what the experience has been like — for them and for you. This is a new feature this year, and we’re always seeking feedback. In fact, the email address to which you can write and tell us is LNFeedback@nytimes.com. Thank you in advance! Please note: All student comments have been lightly edited for length, but otherwise appear just as they were originally submitted. _________ Image Clockwise from top left: Wake Forest University in Winston-Salem, N.C.; Marshall County High School in Benton, Ky.; Italy High School in Italy, Tex.; and the Net Charter School in New Orleans have all had campus shootings in recent days. Credit Clockwise from top left: David Rolfe/The Winston-Salem Journal, via Associated Press; Ryan Hermens/The Paducah Sun, via Associated Press; KDFW Fox4, via Associated Press; Emily Kask Our Student Opinion question “ Are We Becoming ‘Numb’ to School Shootings? ” brought in many comments from readers looking for answers, and a few comments from readers with possible solutions. Gerry Meandering from Ohio had some ideas for reining in guns: Defenders of gun violence always compare deaths by automobile to deaths by shooting to rationalize these tragedies. So let’s peg guns to cars. Gun owners must take a class before owning a gun. Guns must be licensed and registered annually. Guns must be insured and proof of insurance must be kept with the owner. You can’t drive a dragster on the street so you can’t have a high capacity gun. There is no absolute right to drive a car provided in our constitution and there is no absolute right to own a gun. Guns are not “well regulated,” so let’s regulate them. Jocelyn Savard from N.C. answered the prompt with a personal perspective: In Boston, there are a series of billboards promoting gun violence awareness. One reads “Americans killed since the massacre at Sandy Hook” and has a live count of citizen owned gun deaths displayed. I remember walking around a few years ago and being startled at the number. When Sandy Hook happened and my mom told me, I cried for days. Just a few days ago when the notifications showed up on my phone about Kentucky, I barely blinked an eye. Of course, my heart plummeted and I could feel humanity’s downfall one step closer but there was no tears, at church this weekend there was no announcement, no prayer. As a country, we have normalized school shootings so much, made books and movies out of them, make offhand comments about how that guy ‘looks like a school shooter’, that we are rapidly becoming detached to the horror that we call our home. Maggie Yang from King of Prussia, Pa., thinks the nation has become numb to school shootings: I was in a school club after school just the other day when my phone buzzed. I had gotten a News notification about the Kentucky school shooting. I was so shocked about it that I shared the news with other people in the club. I was expecting a reaction similar to mine, but I was so wrong. They simply looked at me and said “so?” I was feeling a confusing mix of emotions: sadness, anger, disgust. The world is becoming more and more “numb” to school shootings which deeply saddens me. I think that it’s because 1) it happens so often now, and 2) it doesn’t affect those outside of the area. Nathanie Doralus from Florida says schools can do more: As a student, I agree that we’ve become numb to the news of school shootings in the United States. My high school has already had two lockdowns this school year because of students bringing guns onto the campus. It happens so often that I think many feel powerless to stop them so the default is to either ignore them or solemnly shake your head in silence. In some ways, I think it’s an attempt to not live in constant fear while attending school and receiving an education because no one should have to. But in other ways, I think some won’t take it seriously until it hits close to home. If we were taking school shootings more seriously than before, then there wouldn’t have been eleven incidents already in the first month of this year. Very few people take active assailant drills at my school seriously. I think that is just an example of denial and how it’s hard to take something seriously unless it actually happens to you or someone you know. Schools can do more than just increasing their security measures and frequently enacting drills. They can also invest in the mental health and well-being of their students and provide the support some of them need in order to prevent these acts of violence. Denislav Kasaivanov from Wilmington, N.C., thinks counseling is part of the answer: I feel as if our society as a whole has become a bit ‘numb’ concerning this subject since it has become all too common ever since the Columbine shootings have taken place. The stigma associated with school shootings has become now an option to many misguided and mentally unstable teenagers who want their names in the headlines — whether it to be for them to desperately seek attention (good or bad). I believe that the remedy for this situation is to provide effective counseling for kids whom exhibit mentally unstable qualities and to always have an emergency-responding force on campus at all times. In addition, I believe that the state should mandate stricter rules around families which own guns; Whilst I still believe that any family has the right to protect themselves with a firearm, it is up to the parental figures to make sure that their children are kept away by all means necessary from any firearms in the house. Schools, families, and first-responders all have a key role in preventing situations like these from occurring; and, if the state could imply far more effective rules concerning entrance on campus, counseling, and school emergency drills, I believe that we could see a substantial drop in school shootings across the nation. Fred Pierre from Ohio believes we should model peaceful solutions: Our warrior society glorifies guns and assault rifles in nearly every TV show and movie, so we shouldn’t be surprised that we place the constitutional right to own these weapons above the right to life, enshrined in our Declaration of Independence. We spend more on our military than any other country, quite a bit more. Taxpayers fund promotions for violent, video war games, as a military recruiting tool. Then we act surprised when someone “settles a score” using firearms. We don’t act like we want to de-escalate conflicts, talk about problems, or reach out to someone who is hurting. We model a Wild West approach to problems — take ten paces and fire. Could we model a peaceful resolution? Heroes that use wisdom and conversation to connect and resolve issues? A better world is possible. Kylie Lundy from Wilmington, N.C., wrote about a school lockdown: Over the years, I have participated in a multitude of active shooting drills. The typical procedures are the classroom lights are turned off, classroom doors are locked, and children are rushed to a side of the classroom that would be difficult for an intruder to spot through a window. They have to remain quiet until the entire school has ‘passed’ the drill. However, one I remember in particular was when my school was shut down for about an hour. The school did not announce if it was a drill so we had to assume there was indeed a threat. I was in the seventh grade. I remember turning down my brightness on my phone and checking to make sure my ringer was off so I could text my parents and closest friends that I loved them very much (just in case). However, I had an escape plan if I needed to evacuate or the shooter were to enter my classroom. My plan was to either jump out the window onto the ground outside or rush to the other door in the back of the room. I was terrified, but I knew I had to remain calm. Eventually, the school announced the lockdown was over, and I later discovered that there was a robbery at a bank near our school. Ultimately, I was relieved. _________ Image Poison control centers last year received 10,570 reports of children 5 or younger being exposed to laundry detergent packets. Credit Daniel Acker/Bloomberg Predictably, students had a lot to say about this latest internet sensation. Abby Tank from Wilmington, N.C. , was ashamed of her generation’s association with the challenge: Tide pods. Who would have thought that teens would start a trend of ingesting chemicals we use for cleaning our laundry? It’s definitely a sad time in our lives when we have to lock up and monitor teens to make sure they don’t willingly consume deadly chemicals. There have been so many challenges over the years: the ice bucket challenge, the mannequin challenge, the straight arm challenge, the floor is lava, the silly salmon, etc., but this is pushing it way to far. It’s one thing to raise awareness for ALS or embarrass a friend in public, but eating Tide pods is just plain stupid. It may start out as a joke, but the consequences of eating Tide pods, also referred to as “the forbidden fruit,” is not a joking matter. Dying due to chemical ingestion all in seek of approval and attention is an absolutely terrible way to die. It’s a pity our generation has to be associated with theses ignorant and foolish challenges. Meghan Miraglia from Massachusetts suggests the reason people join these trends is to have their 15 minutes of fame: When I first heard about the Tide pod challenge, it took every tendon, muscle, and piece of sinew in my body to stop myself from looking up at the sky, throwing my palms up in disgust, and asking the clouds what in the world has happened to humanity, for us to have been brought to a place where we look at pods of detergent and think it’s a brilliant idea to eat them. The internet finds imbecilic activities to do, then challenges other people to do it with them, then watches videos of other people doing the challenge and chortles at clip after clip of so-and-so shoving a spoonful of cinnamon down their throat, or stuffing seven saltines into their gullet without any water, or sprinkling salt on their wrist and rubbing ice on it. We find dumb things to do because it gives us a few precious seconds of fame. For an instant, we become another “challenge video” on the explore page, or the suggested sidebar on YouTube, and the possibility of being Discovered and Liked and Commented On bursts before us like a packet of detergent being bitten open. Then there is the other half of the population that doesn’t think at all, whose brain cells have very likely been replaced by bits of cinnamon and saltine from the previous (and equally stupid) challenges they have done. These are the ones who take it too far. These are the kids that went to your elementary school and jumped off of the monkey bars for the sake of Looking Cool and ended up with two broken arms and a chipped tooth. Maggie Yang from King of Prussia believes teenagers are searching for a sense of belonging: The Tide pod challenge is one of the most seemingly innocent yet extremely dangerous challenges circling the internet. Teenagers are attracted to these trends because they want to have a sense a belonging. They want to be able to relate to people they look up to on social media by replicating their actions. Even though most people know that this can be dangerous, the sense of belonging skews their judgment for the worse. Jillian Lancaster from Wilmington,  N.C. , thinks some people will do anything for amusement: Look, this shouldn’t be such a surprise to everyone. Every year there’s some new dangerous challenge that captures the attention of teenagers across the globe. The reason being, we find the discomfort of others funny. Why do you think that “fail compilations” on YouTube have so many views, or why the reality show “America’s Funniest Home Videos” consists mostly of people falling and/or getting hit with something? It’s what the people want, so the internet provides. While this Tide pod Challenge makes me question the sanity of humanity slightly more than challenges in previous years, it’s not surprising. It’s such a ridiculous idea — I mean, who eats laundry detergent? — that people find it intriguing to watch. However, this challenge has gained much more exposure than your average dangerous fad because the Tide pod challenge turned into a meme. Even those who haven’t tried to eat Tide pods are posting about it. Like the article said, many of these memes are about putting Tide Pods on food. I’ve seen a real life example of this when a local donut shop in my town created a donut that resembled a Tide pod. Things like making a Tide pod shaped donut aren’t meant to be harmful and further spread the challenge, but they inevitably end up doing so. The only way to stop this fad is to stop posting about it because once teens see something has gone out of vogue, they no longer want to do the challenge. But, Alexis Lariviere from Hoggard High School says this latest trend is no laughing matter: Social media seems to promote new challenges almost weekly. The latest obsession is eating a tide pod because it looks like candy and the liquid explodes into your mouth. Let me tell you what else explodes… the pain shooting through your body as these pods burn your throat and mouth. Is it worth it to risk your life for social media views? Last year, 10,570 children under five years old were said to have had exposure to laundry detergent packets. These children see these colorful pods as “candy” or a treat. While young children don’t know any better, it is just sad that young adults are stupid enough to eat something that could kill them. Before you consider eating a Tide pod, think about the 40 hospital cases that have occurred this year just in January alone because of teens willingly eating them. Many social media sites are banning videos of people eating these pods and I support it all the way. Robert Yates from Wilmington, N.C. , thinks the fad is overblown, but brings up an important conversation: While I admit that I’m the first to ridicule every facet of our society that I believe to convey how much the intelligence gap is growing, the “Tide pod challenge” is something that I can’t completely dismantle in good heart. I’ve heard more adults ask me why kids are eating Tide pods than I’ve heard teens talking about it themselves, which is a sure way to know that it’s being blown way out of proportion. I have faith that no one actually believes they can consume laundry detergent and be absolutely fine, and those that do probably can’t reach the shelf any Tide pods would be stored on. The Tide pod challenge is reminiscent of the bleach drinking challenge, in that no one with half of a brain would ever consider partaking in the challenge, however the idea of both play into the suicide culture unfortunately found in many modern teenagers. Not only does this undermine the danger of depression and anxiety, it can also encourage impressionable young teens to possibly have thoughts of suicide as well. So while I won’t scrutinize the Tide pod challenge, I do strongly believe that these dangerous challenges can be potentially harmful to the mental health of susceptible young people _________ Image Danny Amendola celebrated after scoring the game-winning touchdown in the fourth quarter of the Patriots-Jaguars game. Related Article Credit Jim Rogash/Getty Images In the spirit of Super Bowl weekend, we asked students, “ Are You a Football Fan? ” Josh Failla from Wilmington, N.C. , is and he is looking forward to this year’s matchup: Football has always had a special place in my heart. It is a ritual that me and my dad do every Sunday. When one o’clock hits, we sit watching the TV religiously until the games are over. It is something that I love to do, and that includes watching the Super Bowl in a couple weeks. While I don’t agree with the football aspect being out of the spotlight this season, this will not stop me from watching the big game. I am most excited to see in this game if Nick Foles can pull off beating the goat, Tom Brady. Coming in for one of the best quarterbacks in the league (Wentz), Foles has been able to beat expectations and rise above some of the best defenses in the N.F.L. Even the article believes that Foles is blowing up, “Absolutely everything is going Nick Foles way. Philadelphia’s backup quarterback has looked like a superstar.” Even though I believe the Eagles don’t have enough to beat the dynastic Patriots, I feel like the game will be one for the ages. Yadriel Matos from Apopka also loves the game, but acknowledged its controversies: Both of these games were very exciting and very action-packed. Both teams had to overcome insurmountable odds to get to the point where they are at right now. Whether it is losing your top receiver in the middle of the game or losing your rookie quarterback midway through the season, getting to the Super Bowl is very hard. Of course, I am going to watch the Super Bowl because it will a game for the ages. I have been watching the New England Patriots and the Philadelphia Eagles throughout the season because they have two of the top offenses in the league. Kate Silver from Wilmington, N.C. , however, had this to say about the sport: Warning: Unpopular Opinion. Football is the most overrated sport ever. I’m a sports fan. I love to watch basketball and follow tennis matches, but you couldn’t pay me a million bucks to sit down and watch a whole football game. I can’t stand the sport. It is outdated, barbaric, and down right deadly. It amazes me how despite how far humans have evolved within the last millennia, men still injure each other in front of thousands as a form of entertainment. Football is no better than a gladiator tournament or the running of the bulls. It’s a fight to the death. This year’s Super Bowl will be no different than the other 51 before it. Overpaid jocks will rush around a field carrying an inflated piece of leather as if it were their own child. Cult like fans will be glued to their TVs, clinging on to every play like their life depends on it. And me? I’ll be in my room hiding from the madness. Believe me, I won’t be anywhere near the TV during the big game... except for maybe Justin Timberlake’s halftime performance. Michael DiCenzo from NC is ready to see the Patriots go down in history on Sunday: I have grown up watching my idol Tom Brady. I’ve been watching since the beginning of his career with my dad. I was born the first year of the dynasty of TB 12 and Bill Belichick. I have sadly never been to an NFL game, I want to see him play before he retires. Watching Tom on TV go through so many offensive players and still continue to reign the GOAT is incredible. I wish people would stop hating on him. Tom is gonna win and lead the organization to his 6th ring. The Patriots are like the Chicago Bulls with Michael Jordan. Everyone wants to see them finally get taken down. Never count the miracle Brady out. The Patriots have always been a great second half team. I am really excited we have made it again after the tough win against the Jaguars. The Eagles are next. Kasey Kiser from Wilmington, N.C., replied enthusiastically: Being a Patriots fan is brutal for 51 weeks of the year. Even in the offseason, I receive countless remarks, mainly on how the Patriots cheated to win their games. However, Super Bowl Sunday and the following week can bring me the most joy an NFL fan can have. Not only can I relish in the victory of a Super Bowl, but my joy is impenetrable by any rude retorts. It’s a win-win-win. Plus, this year is extra special, as Tom Brady can have as many Super Bowl titles as any other NFL franchise. Additionally, if he wasn’t already, he will be the GOAT in football and maybe even in professional sports. Every year I watch the Super Bowl, because, in general, it’s good football. But when the Patriots are on the big stage, I will not be removed from the couch. So, this year, don’t contact me from kickoff to the awards ceremony, and we’ll be on good terms. Good luck to the Eagles, but be ready for a beatdown. _________ Image Credit Photo illustration by Derek Brahney. Man: SuperStock/Getty Images. Headphones: Swilmor/Getty Images. Our Picture Prompt “ Headphones,"  yielded a wide range of perspectives on what the image is meant to convey. Isabelle Silva from Massachusetts thought about escapism: Blindfolded and a duct taped mouth, this man is oblivious to the world around him. Some people may see that he is closed off to life outside the humming sounds of the red headphones.They could feel that the headphones are shutting him up and shutting him out. With blocked senses, he has lost his ability to express himself. However, though I can recognize this counterpoint, I believe that the headphones are actually opening him up to new experiences and new feelings he may never had gone through without them. Everything except the headphones in this image is in black and white revealing how monotonous and plain life can end up being without the pop of color. His cookie-cutter hairstyle and a clean-cut suit represent the boxes that society tends to put us in. As well, the blindfold and his mouth being taped shut adds to the ways life is restricting him from having a voice and truly seeing. With the headphones however, this man is being brought to life with varied colors, emotions and flourishing in a whole different world outside reality. In my personal experience, headphones, and further music, has become my escape from reality. Though my reality is oftentimes amazing (which I am grateful for), it can be difficult and hard to deal with. Listening to music enables me to reflect as well as enjoy solidarity. This piece of art represents a feeling to me; a feeling of being trapped but then being able to let go and experience color through a different lens (music). Hal Warren from Massachusetts examined the facts: When first examining this image, I wanted to not think solely about the symbolism. I wanted to examine the facts about the picture itself. One may think at first glance that these are regular headphones, meaning he might be listening to something. I noticed quite quickly that these are noise cancellation headphones. This means he can’t speak, see or hear. It can also be observed that he is dressed like a businessman, someone with power. After observing I then started to think about what it could be a symbol for. I believe the meaning behind this is that this man could represent the managers behind all the powerful men being accused of sexual misconduct as of late. The higher ups had to know something, yet they allowed their clients to walk free. This would mean they chose not to see anything, hear anything or say anything. Though that theory is very specific, I also feel that it could be more general. There are so many powerful people who see bad things happen and choose to keep quiet about it due to fear of losing their power. When I went to read the article, the first paragraph opened my eyes. I knew of the Presidents many twitter scandals and I often wondered why he wasn’t banned from the social media. When initially thinking about the pictures meaning, this completely slipped my mind though makes so much sense. The use of the word “complicit” is perfect and is completely in line with my thoughts regarding the picture. Collin MacRae from Massachusets thinks it important that people think for themselves: Personally, I believe that the image is trying to convey the idea that with all of the new forms of media and all that is going on in politics right now, people are losing the ability to form their own opinions, the just listen to what other people say and do not think for themselves or craft an original idea. The fact that the man in the image only has headphones on and his mouth and eyes are covered suggests that all he does is passively listen to the ideas others try to force upon them and do not look at the situation themselves and try to speak their mind. I think that this rings true especially nowadays because with the news stations, political magazines and other forms of media trying to force their opinion into the minds of their audience, the audience members have begun to stop thinking about the situation themselves and just take in what other people have to say about the issue. This is very relevant because whenever people try to argue about a topic especially in politics it just seems like everybody is regurgitating the same point made by some news anchor or political analysts and nobody has their own personal view on the situation. I think that it is very important that people begin to think for themselves again because without the ability to create an idea for themselves society is going to drift into a mind numbing state were nobody is even able to think for themself any more and there will be no variety in peoples opinions. Ishan Patel from Wilmington, N.C., found a political meaning: The image in the prompt shows a person who is blindfolded and duck taped on mouth, that could symbolize many things but I personally thought it represents something like rumors that are shared because you hear a rumor, but you haven’t seen what the rumor is or even discuss with the person to who the rumor relates to. As I examine the picture the picture more I seem to realize that the person was wearing a headphone not only that but it was red while the other part of the picture was black and white, red could represent our country’s government because it is republican which is red. So, I thought that the picture here relates to our current government and the steps that they are taking. The image could represent that the people who fail to recognize the perspective of the government or are not able to talk about it. Tyler Rouse from Wilmington N.C., hopes for a better way for teens to find their voices: My first thought was how many teenagers and kids use headphones constantly and are cut off from society. They don’t have a voice in today’s politics or opinions. I disagree with this completely. I love to listen to headphones to calm myself down or jam out in the car. I think I notice more and I am more attentive with headphones, especially in the car while listening to music. It’s great to notice where I am and what’s going on outside. I think that the tape over the eyes and mouth are symbols for how teenagers don’t have a big of an impact on society as adults do. Unfortunately, I believe that this is true. Let me explain. There aren’t many platforms or places for teens to discuss situations or problems in the real world with adults or politicians. Adults either won’t listen or think their own ideas or better. You could argue that there are social media platforms that teens can access. Many adults and politicians aren’t able to see the comments that are made by teens because teens don’t have many followers or social media sites don’t show their comments. I think there should be a better way for teens to put their voice out into the world and not be blindfolded by adults. This is one reason I enjoy commenting in The New York Times because I know that adults and teens alike are able to access my comments. McKenzie Ingram from Wilmington, N.C., says complaints often go unnoticed: The first thing that I thought of when I saw this image was that sometimes we are forced to take orders or listen to something that we aren’t allowed to speak up about. We are sometimes forced to receive information and there’s nothing that we can do about it. We hear these things and we can’t see them for what they truly are, and we can’t voice our opinions on them. I find that this relates to changes that are being made today in the world politically. The people of our nation most of the time are forced to sit and listen to what our president wants to happen. We can try and reach out discussing our complaints but sometimes they go unnoticed. We are forced to sit and listen to the new laws of our land, without being able to say anything to stop it and without being able to see the long term effects. And Meghan Miraglia from Massachusetts said headphones are a buffer: Welcome to America — home of the blind eye and the closed mouth, home of the perpetually open ears, perfectly coifed hair, and pressed suits. Land of the tainted minds and unoriginal thoughts, where, somehow, everyone hears everything but says nothing. We absorb. We immerse. We are always taking in, even if we are not aware of it. The headphones are a double-sided metaphor. They are America’s security blanket — we can choose what we hear, and we can make it agree with the little voice in our head, and that can be all that we hear if we want it to be. They are the buffer between the real world, where things aren’t as perfect and poised as we’d like them to be, where opinions aren’t in perfect correlation with ours, where there are voices other than the one that we feed our minds with. Or, they are world itself. They are all we ever hear, they are all we ever absorb, they are all we have ever or will ever know, and we let them speak for us. The headphones become our voices, and soon they become louder than the inkling of conscience inside of us. I’d like to say that I can’t relate, that I refuse to let the roaring wildfire of the world overcome the spark in me, but I suppose in some ways, I can relate. I let the voice of everyone else, the roar of television and the scream of media overtake me, until sometimes, I find myself tainted and unoriginal. But, I suppose in many ways, every teenager, every adult, every American, feels that way at some point. _________ After watching the Academy Awards last week, we wanted to know: “ Is Hollywood Becoming More Diverse? ” Overall, students were optimistic about the direction in which the film industry is heading. Athena Brenner from  Wilmington, N.C. , said, yes: Seeing as how the Oscars went last year, it would seem as though Hollywood is very much whitewashing the film industry. However, whitewashing has also died down quite a bit. Since the uproar caused by casting Scarlett Johansson in the movie “Ghost In The Shell”, directors have been making more diverse castings in all sorts of movies. For example, the three newest films brought into the Star Wars series gave fans new characters that showed off plenty more races than one. In upcoming movies, Disney is currently casting characters for a live-action movie version of “The Lion King” and “Mulan”. Both of these casting lists so far show only actors and actresses who fit the setting and plot of these movies. Also coming up, Marvel Studios has been flaunting trailers for their “Black Panther” movie, which takes place in Africa and rightfully sports the African culture all while making an awesome superhero movie. These examples and more show fans that although Hollywood obviously needs some work, there are movies and directors out there making an effort to turn Hollywood around and give the people what/who they want to see on the big screen. And Anosha Sakhawat from Los Angeles, Calif., thought protests were to thank for the progress: In my opinion I think that Hollywood is becoming more diverse especially considering that the past few years of the Oscars have consisted of white nominees and winners. However Hollywood is now creating new opportunity for everyone regardless of race recently Priyanka Chopra, a Bollywood actor, is a known name due to her hit series “Quantico.” Similarly with the coming of the new Marvel movie “Black Panther,” which marks Marvel’s first black superhero. Something very exciting. Ultimately people voicing their outrage at the lack of diversity presented in Hollywood, has started to bring change. Logan Bolduc from Wilmington was hopeful about Hollywood’s growth, but sees more to be done: I think that Hollywood is becoming more diverse, it is just that actors and actresses of different races are not being nominated for awards and getting the credit that they deserve for the roles that they have played in films. And I think this is wrong, I have seen many great films with lead actors and actresses that are of ethnic backgrounds but award shows like the Oscars and the Golden Globes are not giving them full credit for their performances. Social media is now a place where people share their opinions about how award shows went and a main topic is always race. People will point out areas where actors were underrepresented. Some actors and actresses like Viola Davis and Denzel Washington seem to be nominated almost every year which is great because the academies are broadening their horizons and nominating more African-American actors. But many performances go unnoticed and are underrated in the eyes the academies. _________ Image A bunch of youths, just hanging. But what to call them? Credit Angela Weiss/Agence France-Presse — Getty Images We asked, “ What Should We Call Your Generation? ” and why, and we got the following suggestions: Jared Casey from United States thinks “iGen” is suitable: A generational name is a label given to a mass of millions of individuals that outlines the mannerisms of the people based on the general point in history they were born; this may mean wars, tech, or population changes characterize the population. More often than not, these names are seen as a complete and utter nuisance. Millennials are — unfortunately — seen as lazy people who lack the drive to succeed outside of the home. This assertion remains untrue for a majority of the “millennials”. Baby Boomers are blamed for many population issues that their gen. unwittingly caused. Again, this name is fitting for the population trends that occurred, but has a negative connotation that is related to problems outside the control of the people in the generation. In essence, these names are given to masses of people for demographics to pick on one another at the dinner table. Millennials have assembled their cohort to blame the U.S.’s problems on Baby Boomers, and vice versa. Gen X, Y, and Z all call each other out on the ever-so-slight differences that categorize each group. Gens. are only understood in retrospect, but I believe that the current titling of iGen is fitting, as this gen. saw Apple storm every market worldwide and completely reshape even the most rudimentary functions of interaction. Tj Salvo from Danvers, Mass., likes “The Shift Generation” for a generational name: What will the group after the Millennials be called? This question is one that I think is very important not only to me who is part of this generation, but to everyone else too. Our of name or label will be how the world will not only see us, but what we’ve done as a generation. A name needs to capture the essence of what we are, who we are and what we have done. This generation is changing the world day by day, in every aspect. In my eyes I see us as, The Shift Generation. Although it is not as catchy, it is meaningful. We have shifted so many parts of the world and did it for the best. We have taken these social norms that have been around for years and shifted them. Turned them upside down. This generation is shifting our history from going down one road and going in a completely opposite direction. The Shift Generation. Zoie Titsworth from Bryant, Ariz., likes “Dynamical Generation” best: Our generation is filled with individuals who are open-minded and strongly believe in equality for all. As our generation flourishes we will further realize the importance in becoming self motivated individuals and will thrive in our multicultural society. A name that would reflect our diverse society would be the, “Dynamical Generation.” Sydney B. Bryant from Arizona opts for “Programmers” as a title: I think the best term would be the “Programmers.” Not only does it allude to our exposure to technology and the internet from a young age, it also symbolizes how we are the foundations of times to come. Thus, we are “programming” the future. Whittni from NV prefers “Generation Activism” over all other choices: The best term IMO would be “Generation Activism.” We are passionate. We actively seek easy solutions and desire to improve lives. We do not care if someone is gay, or abnormal. We just agree that people are people — and that people deserve to be treated as such. We want to protect our values without falling victim to trashy corporate schemes. Megan from Pennsylvania said simply: I think “Gen Z” will suffice. Amy from California likes “Technology Generation” the best: I heard that we should be called Generation Z. Actually, to me this name brings on a feeling that we are the last generation to survive and the world will be brought down by us. I actually think we could be called the “Technology Generation.” Sherry from California said “Selfie Generation” is apt: A name that I have heard circulating around the internet is “Selfie Generation.” I think that this is an appropriate name for this generation because social media is indisputably a huge part of the modern world. Everywhere we go, we are bound to see people with their heads down, staring at their phones. Older generations often make fun of modern teenagers for staying inside all day using their phones instead of frolicking outside like in the good ol’ days. Their criticisms are valid; this is the generation that spends the most time with technology, simply because we have access to various types of social media that didn’t even exist before. “Selfie” generation doesn’t necessarily have to represent the pictures that people post of themselves on social media; it can just represent the huge impact of social media on modern society. It is almost impossible to avoid social media because even schools and employers are utilizing it for professional purposes. Hence, I think that this name is suitable. Scarlet from Arkansas wants to remain nameless: Due to the fact that each name recommended can somehow fit our generation, and that we can’t be fit into a single category, I think that the Nameless Generation would fit the best. There is no name to describe us and fit each aspect of our diverse and unique generation. _________ Image Credit Paul Rogers In response to our Student Opinion question, “ How Do You Cope With Grief? ” , commenters shared their personal stories of loss and gave suggestions for how to support others going through hardship. Garrett Brian Geschickter from Wilmington, N.C. , explained how he grieved the death of a grandparent: I recently lost one of my grandparents a little over a month ago. It was sudden and was somewhat of a harsh shock when I was told, but there was also a slight sense of relief, like mentioned in the article. My grandmother had been in pain for a long time, being told time and time again that she wouldn’t live much longer, and how the pain her lungs caused her seemed to be getting worse and worse. Grief, especially when it pertains to someone in your family, does not have a negative stigma around it. However, it is something that everyone must encounter eventually. Expressing your feelings is probably one of the best ways to grieve, no matter in what format. The article talks about great ways of doing this. Writing, talking to someone, or even just expressing those feelings aloud to no one are ways to help you get through the grieving process. However, being someone who has a friend who is in mourning, the best thing to do is to give them space. Don’t rush them and try to hurry the process along. That can and will cause a negative reaction. Whenever I have been grieving, my friends did just this and I came out of it okay. When Emily from California is sad, she faces her feelings head-on: As stated in the article, grief causes many “common pitfalls and misunderstandings.” It is quite hard for me to cope with grief. I am the type of person to hold in all of my emotions, rather than expressing it. I do not like to talk about my feelings of sadness when it comes to grief. It takes time to fully heal from grief and the process cannot be rushed. Many emotions come with grief, such as anger and anxiety — those feelings are all common. When I am in the state of constant sadness, I allow myself to be sad, rather than to hide my emotions behind a mask. The best way someone could comfort me is to lend me their shoulder to cry on. No words are required or necessary, the thought of them being there is very comforting. Grant Holland from Wilmington, N.C. , turns to religion: Sadly, I have experienced the death of a loved one in my life. This person I knew, and loved, ever since I was born and I had a really strong connection with him. I was really sad when he had passed away and I really did miss him. Like many say, grief takes time and I do agree, but time itself will not fix the grief. The way I handled the death of a loved one is by staying close to my religion. With my religion, I understand that I would be able to see this loved one again. This gave me hope when dealing with the death of my loved one. During that time I surrounded myself with my family and we were able to give each other comfort by providing each other company. It has now been six years since the death and I am doing just fine. Life does have some sad times but also its happy times. Of course I am still going to miss this loved one, but I always strive to think of the good times instead of the bad in order to move on. In my opinion, the best way to handle someone that is grieving is to always be there for them during that moment of time, and to let them know that. By doing this it reminds that person that someone is there for them and loves them. This gives them hope to get through the sad times. Sydney Farnam from Arkansas suggests everyone can find their own personal way to mourn: There are many ways to cope with grief. Some usually try to forget and move on while others sit alone away from everyone because they feel like they have no one who will understand. What I find interesting about the subject of grief is that everyone experiences it from time to time, but we feel as nobody could ever understand us. It’s a personal, psychological process that we must conquer in order to obtain the feeling of happiness again. The only problem is, how do we accomplish this battle? Many go to counseling to talk about their problems. Some resort to addiction such as alcohol or drugs which leads to even more pain for themselves and the loved ones who care for their mental and physical health. Everyone is different which is why I firmly believe there is no “correct” way to cope with grief. There is no “deadline” for when all the pain will stop. It takes our own mind to overcome the challenges and to test our limits to what we can withstand. Athena Brenner from Wilmington, N.C. , shared the lessons she has learned from comforting friends who are grieving: In my life so far I have been lucky enough to avoid the grief of losing someone who I was very close with. However, I am often the friend in the situation who becomes the shoulder to cry on. That being said, I still often times make mistakes and say the wrong things in certain situations. Over the past few years, I have learned that it is better to insist that someone is going to be okay rather then asking them if they are. If a person would like to discuss their life, they will on their own. However, your job isn’t to know what the problem is, it is to simply comfort them until they are ready to accept the issue and/or move on. I’ve also found that comparing your issues to theirs when they are sad, is a useless tactic, and considerably rude. A person in pain doesn’t want to hear about that time you went through “almost the exact same thing” five years ago, or how they “have it easy” compared to what you had to go through in the past. Letting them know they aren’t alone is a good route to go, but what I have just described is not the way to do it. Overall, listen to your grieving friends and/or family. If they don’t want to talk about their problems, don’t make them. Often times, talking isn’t necessary. Comforting body language could be all that is needed to make a person feel safe and protected. Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              