   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Briefing Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by James Comey, Chuck Berry, N.C.A.A. Basketball: Your Monday Briefing Image Chuck Berry in concert in 1971. Mr. Berry, who died on Saturday at his home near St. Louis, was arguably the first true rock ’n’ roll superstar. Credit Donal F. Holway/The New York Times By  Chris Stanford March 20, 2017 (Want to get this briefing by email? Here’s the sign-up .) Good morning. Here’s what you need to know: •  F.B.I. is investigating Russia ties. James B. Comey, the F.B.I. director, confirmed before the House intelligence committee today that his agency was investigating Russian meddling in the election and Moscow’s relationship to the Trump campaign. (Before the hearing, President Trump had dismissed the accusations as “FAKE NEWS” on Twitter this morning.) Mr. Comey also said that he had no information supporting Mr. Trump’s claim that he was wiretapped on the orders of President Barack Obama. The unsubstantiated assertion has renewed a debate about whether security agencies invade Americans’ privacy. Overlapping inquiries by the House, the Senate and the F.B.I. have been plagued by partisan sniping . • Gorsuch gets his moment. Judge Neil M. Gorsuch is set to make his first lengthy public remarks since Mr. Trump nominated him for the Supreme Court. The Senate Judiciary Committee is scheduled to begin considering the judge’s nomination this morning. Here’s what to expect . Image Confirmation hearings for Judge Neil M. Gorsuch are set to begin today. Credit Gabriella Demczuk for The New York Times We have some advice for Judge Gorsuch , based on the experiences of past nominees, and for Senate Democrats, who face two difficult paths . • The Pentagon’s rising power. The president is shifting more authority over operations to military commanders, according to White House officials, reversing what aides and some generals say was a tendency under Mr. Obama to micromanage. But Mr. Trump has so far maintained his predecessor’s strategy of trying to minimize the American military’s footprint overseas . Image Soldiers in Chad taking part in a drill with a U.S. Special Forces trainer, lying prone, this month. Such exercises are part of a broader American strategy to support indigenous armies to fight their own wars. Credit Bryan Denton for The New York Times • Britain sets a start date for “Brexit.” The government said today that it intended to formally notify the European Union of its intention to leave the bloc on March 29, putting the country on track to complete a withdrawal by early 2019. • He made rock ’n’ roll what it is. Without Chuck Berry’s twitchy, gloriously accessible songs, there would have been no Rolling Stones, no Beatles, no Bob Dylan — at least not as we know them. So writes one of our critics in appraising the musical pioneer, who died on Saturday at 90 . We examined 15 of Mr. Berry’s most essential songs , including “Johnny B. Goode” and “Roll Over Beethoven.” • The heavy toll of SWAT teams. In the war on drugs, few tactics have proved as dangerous as the use of forcible-entry raids to serve search warrants. Our investigation found that the interventions had led to avoidable deaths, gruesome injuries and costly settlements. We also look at whether it’s murder or self-defense when an officer is killed in a raid. •  The Daily, your audio news report. In today’s show, our reporter talks about his yearlong investigation into what happens when SWAT officers storm into homes to execute search warrants. Listen from a computer , on an iOS device or on an Android device . Business • The U.S. broke with allies over trade as Steven Mnuchin, the Treasury secretary, signaled at a Group of 20 meeting that the Trump administration would review existing agreements. • William A. Ackman was on his way to being a Wall Street legend — until one of his biggest wagers went very wrong . • The leadership exodus at Uber continues, with the president of ride sharing and a senior mapping executive the latest to announce their departures . • U.S. stocks were mixed on Friday. Here’s a snapshot of global markets . Smarter Living • This month , we’ve been talking about morning routines, focusing on guidance and tips for weekdays. But what about the weekend? For eight years, our Metropolitan section has asked New Yorkers about their Sunday routines. Some regular themes: sleeping in late, spending more time with family, and enjoying cultural activities. You can find the full archives of Sunday Routines here , with responses from Lin-Manuel Miranda , Vanessa Bayer of “Saturday Night Live” and the writer Pete Hamill , among others. • Recipe of the day : This simple spinach, tofu and sesame stir-fry makes a satisfying meatless meal. Over the weekend • The new secretary of state broke with a half-century of practice and didn’t allow State Department correspondents on his plane during his trip to Asia . Rex W. Tillerson told the sole reporter he permitted on board: “I’m not a big media press access person. I personally don’t need it.” • Did the president play golf?  We’re not sure . Image President Trump at Joint Base Andrews in Maryland on Sunday. He returned to Washington after spending the weekend in Florida. Credit Al Drago/The New York Times • South Carolina shocked Duke , a No. 2 seed, in the N.C.A.A. men’s basketball tournament . On Saturday, the tournament’s top seed, Villanova, was upset by Wisconsin . On the women’s side, No. 1-seeded Notre Dame survived a scare and beat Purdue in overtime. • Beauty + Beast = Blockbuster. Disney’s latest broke multiple Hollywood records and raked in $170 million at the North American box office. Noteworthy • Defying a high-rise boom. In today’s 360 video , watch as some Shanghai residents resist the demolition of their homes to make room for skyscrapers. Video Amid the construction of massive skyscrapers in Shanghai, some residents resist the demolition of their homes. The construction continues around them. Published On March 20, 2017 Credit Image by Sarah Li/The New York Times. Technology by Samsung. • Turkey’s state of emergency. As part of our series about the crises facing the country , we visit the family of an imprisoned journalist and a neighborhood leader who was shot while defending the government. • In memoriam. Derek Walcott’s intricately metaphorical poetry captured the beauty of the Caribbean and the harsh legacy of colonialism, earning him the 1992 Nobel Prize in Literature. He was 87. Jimmy Breslin, a New York City newspaper columnist and best-selling author, leveled the powerful and elevated the powerless for more than 50 years with a jagged-glass wit. He was 88. Back Story For International Women’s Day this month, we looked at countries with the highest percentage of women in Parliament. Today, we’re answering a reader’s follow-up question: What is it like on the other side of the equation, for women who hold just a few seats in national legislatures? Image Supriya Sule, left, is one of the relatively few female lawmakers in the lower house of the Indian Parliament. Credit Vipin Kumar/Hindustan Times, via Getty Images In India, roughly 12 percent of the 545-member Lok Sabha , or lower house of Parliament, are women. Supriya Sule, who is serving her second term, acknowledged that women sometimes received comments about their appearance from colleagues that men would not. She said she tried to ignore them. “I just brush it aside,” Ms. Sule, 47, said. “I am a professional.” A male lawmaker might say of a female colleague’s outfit, “Oh, what a beautiful sari it is, it’s nicer than the sari you were wearing yesterday,” she added. “I come to Parliament to work, I don’t know what you were wearing yesterday.” Ms. Sule said she hoped Prime Minister Narendra Modi would push for a long-stalled bill to ensure one-third of the seats in the Lok Sabha and in state assemblies were filled by women. “We must have equal representation,” she said. Nida Najar contributed reporting. _____ Photographs may appear out of order for some readers. Viewing this version of the briefing should help. Your Morning Briefing is published weekdays at 6 a.m. Eastern and updated on the web all morning . What would you like to see here? Contact us at briefing@nytimes.com . You can sign up here to get the briefing delivered to your inbox. Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              