   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Times Insider Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by ‘A Mother Simply Cannot Win’ By  Lela Moore and Fahima Haque May 13, 2017 Here are the top 10 comments of the week on our digital platforms, as selected by our readers and the journalists who moderate nearly every comment. Some comments were edited for length and clarity. One of our most-commented-on stories this week was about the firing of James B. Comey, the F.B.I. director. Our story received more than 6,500 comments. We rounded up some of the most notable ones here . Becoming a Mother Image Credit Bill Tiernan/Virginian-Pilot, via Associated Press 1. I am not surprised many women are opting out of motherhood. There is no village, just a pile of unrealistic expectations and harsh criticism waiting for mothers. On the whole, the public is far more moved by unfortunate pets than children — children are to be seen and not heard and any wrong they do is the fault of negligent and indulgent parenting. All this despite the fact that mothers nowadays engage in much more paid work outside the home AND spend more hours with children in the home. A mother simply cannot win. — Pandora in Texas, reacting to an article about the physical, psychological and social changes a woman endures after giving birth. This comment received more than 170 reader recommendations. Image Credit Al Drago/The New York Times Trump Fires Comey 2. We had the Saturday Night Massacre. Now we are having the ‘Saturday Night Live’ Massacre. — Brodston in Grena, Nebraska, reacting to an article about the firing of Mr. Comey. Comparisons were drawn to the Watergate investigation under President Richard Nixon and Trump’s career in reality television. Image Credit Al Drago/The New York Times 3. Excellent. Now the FBI can finally investigate Hillary Clinton. Great leadership shown by our president and his administration. — Jeff Yepsen on The New York Times’s Facebook page . Image Credit Christian Hansen for The New York Times School Choice 4. It is nauseating to read headlines about schools not “delivering” results. Love and care comes from OUR love and care. You can’t order it like a pizza. — Aaron Paul in Michigan, reacting to an article about the New York City high school admissions process, which was designed to allow every student to choose a well-performing school but which in practice has had many shortcomings. This comment received more than 300 reader recommendations. Image Credit Holly Andres for The New York Times Open Marriage 5. My wife and I love each other dearly and we’re extremely happy. We have all the same little silly arguments about stupid stuff that everyone else does, but we’re great at resolving conflict and treating each other with respect, empathy and affection. I shudder at the thought of living my life without my beautiful wife by my side. The fact that we occasionally sleep with our friends doesn’t change any of that. — Jake White on The Times’s Facebook page, responding to an article about nonmonogamous couples. Image Credit Pool photo by Thomas Samson French Election Hacking 6. France’s final round of the presidential campaign lasted less than a month. Our campaigns grind on for two years, leaving ample time for mischief and lying. Russia had a much smaller window with France. The seeds didn’t have time to grow. — Ker in New York, reacting to an article about the relatively minimal repercussions of a “massive” hacking into Emmanuel Macron’s presidential campaign. This comment received more than 350 reader recommendations. Image Credit Samuel Aranda for The New York Times Playing Against, and Beating, the Boys 7. I’m so proud of these girls. But I’m also proud of the boys who took the loss with grace and class. I’m glad that the league decided that the solution to losing and protecting your child’s confidence wasn’t to limit competition; instead, they decided to get better. — Curtis Sumpter in New York , reacting to an article about a girls’ soccer team in Spain that competes against boys’ teams and defeated 13 of them for a junior regional title. Image Credit Damon Winter/The New York Times Ben Platt’s Performance in “Dear Evan Hansen” 8. My kids knew Ben Platt from their days at a camp in California where he was a camp counselor. They insisted we go to this play and — WOW — it was an amazing experience. Teenagers loved it and related to the social media parts. Parents loved it and related to the Mom’s song in the second half. Not a dry eye in the theater. In fact, I distinctly heard sobbing. — Dana Giese Sacks on The Times’s Facebook page, responding to a profile of the actor Ben Platt, who was nominated for a Tony Award for his performance in the Broadway musical “Dear Evan Hansen.” Image Credit Oriana Koren for The New York Times Los Angeles Food Scene Takes Off 9. The real beauty and strength behind L.A.’s restaurant scene isn’t some photogenic white girls cooking really expensive Middle Eastern-inspired food or even a well conceived dining experience like Salazar. It’s the chefs — many who are immigrants — cooking the food they know and the children of immigrants innovating on those traditions with their American experience. THAT is interesting and THAT is what L.A. is about. — Hank in Santa Monica, California, reacting to an article on the Los Angeles restaurant scene. Image Credit Jim Watson/Agence France-Presse — Getty Images The Nugget Kid 10. Guy on internet: “CAN I GET FREE NUGGETS FOR A YEAR” Flint, MI: “CAN WE PLEASE GET SOME DRINKABLE WATER?” — @JasperAvi on Twitter, responding to an article about a teenager who set a record for the most retweeted tweet after asking Wendy’s how many retweets he would need for a year’s supply of free chicken nuggets. Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              