   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index New York Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by No Need to Rise at a de Blasio News Conference: He Will Be Sitting, Too Image Mayor Bill de Blasio at a news conference on Oct. 19 about the fatal shooting by the police of Deborah Danner, a mentally ill woman in the Bronx. Credit Dave Sanders for The New York Times By  J. David Goodman Oct. 26, 2016 Fiorello H. La Guardia and Abraham D. Beame, both 5-foot-2, stood for them. John V. Lindsay, at 6-foot-4, likewise, did not slouch away. For as long as anyone can remember, mayors of all stature in New York City have held news conferences on all sorts of matters, from all sorts of political viewpoints — but almost always standing. Bill de Blasio, the tallest mayor in New York’s modern history at 6-foot-5, has come to embrace a different stance: He prefers a sitting news conference. Lecterns and podiums are out; tables and chairs are in. They now appear not only during City Hall events, but wherever the mayor goes. Libraries. Gymnasiums. A construction site . Inside a firehouse in Lower Manhattan. Outside a senior center. Somber events such as the bombing in Chelsea, and the subsequent manhunt, have forced pauses in the routine, as Mr. de Blasio stood to address nationally televised news conferences. But with the threat diminished and a suspect in custody, he has retaken his seat. Last week, the mayor sat alone at a table in City Hall to deliver sober remarks and answer questions about the killing of a 66-year-old mentally ill black woman, Deborah Danner, by a police officer in her Bronx apartment. More typically, as he did on Wednesday, the mayor sits with other elected officials or guests who deliver brief remarks and then often remain, seated, during the question-and-answer session with reporters. The effect is part panel discussion, part awkward family Last Supper. “He’s flattening the dominance hierarchy,” said Carrie Keating, a professor of psychology at Colgate University who studies nonverbal cues in power, status and leadership. “One thing that’s connected with dominance is being high on the vertical.” Image Mr. de Blasio at a Manhattan firehouse in September. At 6-foot-5 the tallest mayor in New York’s modern history, he favors a sitting news conference. Credit Ángel Franco/The New York Times Mr. de Blasio, with his height, is giving up more than the usual amount of vertical by sitting. “On the upside, he should get more conversation, more honest conversation,” Dr. Keating said. “On the downside, he’s diminished his power.” Even those who have stood in similar-size shoes do not necessarily agree with the mayor’s seated position. “I’ve always felt that height is an advantage, not a disadvantage, in politics,” said Bill Bradley, the former New Jersey senator and New York Knick, who is also 6-foot-5. “When you’re sitting, you’re like every other politician. When you’re standing, you’re you at your fullest self.” At the tables, Mr. de Blasio often appears roughly the same height as those around him. At the firehouse this month, the mayor sat at the center, huddled with an array of fire officials and elected leaders on 10 blue folding chairs. Shoulders rubbed. Microphones were shared. The fire commissioner, Daniel A. Nigro, who aides say is 6-foot-3, appeared taller than the mayor at times. The scene — a fire van parked perpendicularly behind, ceiling fans spinning above — had been prearranged at the request of the mayor’s office, acting, of course, at the behest of the mayor. Mr. de Blasio, aides say, likes the tables and chairs because they add an air of informality, not to mention a chorus of other voices. The genesis of the sitting mayor came earlier this year, after Mr. de Blasio sat for a news conference with health department officials and social workers, and later told his staff he thought that people seemed more at ease, according to a City Hall aide who spoke on the condition of anonymity because Mr. de Blasio is known to dislike media coverage about the theater of his office. So they did a few more, the person said, and the arrangement evolved into the default setup whenever the mayor addressed the media for news conferences — particularly the weekly exchanges in which he allows questions of reporters’ choosing, rather than on a topic he has selected. Some City Hall officials felt reporters were less hostile to a seated mayor, though there is some evidence to the contrary; the blue tables had no apparent calming effect at a lengthy back-and-forth at City Hall in which Mr. de Blasio defended keeping secret communications with so-called agents of the city — a position that the city is now defending in court . Image Mr. de Blasio at an August news conference announcing an investment in the city’s parks. Credit Edwin J. Torres for The New York Times Nor did being seated dampen Mr. de Blasio’s anger toward a New York Post reporter, whom he dressed down for working for a “ right-wing rag ” while seated at a news conference this month. No tables were present at one recent news conference on Rikers Island — perhaps because the advance team could not get there to set them up — but the mayor still sat when he was not speaking, on a high chair by the lectern. He brought stools, but no tables, to an outdoor announcement, on a corner in Downtown Brooklyn. “We are most used to seeing leaders sitting in times of crises — for instance, a presidential address from the Oval Office — or when they are striking a more conversational tone such as a Barbara Walters interview,” said Evan Thies, a political strategist. “Many elected officials — unintentionally — can appear combative from a podium, especially during long news conferences. Sitting conveys the impression that the elected cares as much about the question as they do the answer.” The optics may in fact be only part of the reason for the new setup, according to the mayor, who was asked by a reporter about the tables when they first started appearing regularly in the spring. “These are long, long proceedings,” Mr. de Blasio said in June. “It just makes more sense to sit down.” Mr. de Blasio also sits for short news conferences, including at the firehouse, which clocked in at 34 minutes. Perhaps the mayor is attuned to the effect his height can have on others who may feel diminished standing near him. Mr. Bradley said that he had not spoken with the mayor about the benefits or travails of life as a tall politician, but said he could imagine reasons besides height that one might want to sit for a news conference. “You don’t have to worry about what do you do with your body, how do you move, where do you hold your arms, do you go from one foot to the other, do you stand at attention, do you walk around, do you turn your body,” Mr. Bradley mused. “So it solves a lot of problems if you sit down.” Mr. Bradley recalled an occasion in 1964 when he shook President Lyndon B. Johnson’s hand in a receiving line at the White House as part of the Olympic team. President Johnson happily posed for photographs with the shorter athletes, but when it was time for Mr. Bradley, the captain of the gold-medal basketball team, to pose, the president did not turn to the camera. Instead, Mr. Bradley recalled, the president’s instructions were brief: “Move on.” “I think politicians are very sensitive to height,” Mr. Bradley said. “But usually it’s that a politician doesn’t want to stand next to another politician who is taller.” A version of this article appears in print on , on Page A 23 of the New York edition with the headline: New Mayoral Perspective: Speaking From His Seat . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              