   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Real Estate Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Living In The West 80s: An Aesthetic of Its Own Living In the West 80s 11 Photos View Slide Show  › Image Karsten Moran for The New York Times By  Aileen Jacobson Jan. 13, 2016 Kim Johnson was introduced to the West 80s of Manhattan about a dozen years ago when she attended a party there, on one of the blocks between Riverside Drive and West End Avenue. She was then renting an apartment in the West 70s, with her husband, Scott, but she found something different, “something really magical,” in the 80s. To her, the area felt quiet, green, community-minded and “cozy,” she said. “We thought we were in a whole different city.” The Johnsons, who are Canadian, bought a ground-floor fixer-upper in a co-op near Riverside Drive that they renovated, soon adding another apartment above them, an alley behind the apartment that they bought from the co-op and turned into a “backyard,” and an apartment next door for Ms. Johnson’s father. They are raising their son, Jack, now 11, and daughter, Kate, 8, in the apartment. “Everything is here,” said Ms. Johnson, 45, who runs her own business making guards for city sidewalk trees. “We just tumble out the door and we’re in Riverside Park riding our bikes, all four of us.” Of course, the entire West 80s neighborhood, which also encompasses the more commercial streets of Broadway, Columbus Avenue and Amsterdam Avenue, is not so idyllic. But the area does “seem to have a different aesthetic” from its neighbors to the north and south, said Melissa Elstein, the secretary and a founding member of the West 80s Neighborhood Association . Besides streets lined with historic buildings, she said, it has “a lot of healthy restaurants”; an abundance of yoga classes (Ms. Elstein, 49, who has a law degree, now teaches yoga); and many residents who care about the environment. Image 219 WEST 81ST STREET, #4F A two-bedroom two-bath condo in a building with a gym and a roof terrace, listed at $2.175 million. (917) 279-7925 Credit Karsten Moran for The New York Times The association’s Recycling and Zero Waste Forum in November drew about 100 people, she said, and the inaugural Love Your Tree Day last May is scheduled for a reprise this spring. The Wild Bird Fund , a nonprofit rehabilitating injured wildlife, is in a Columbus Avenue storefront. The area is also rich with social service organizations, Ms. Elstein said, including Dorot , which has programs for seniors; the Goddard Riverside Community Center , which offers services and 167 affordable apartments for older adults and people with mobility impairments; and the West Side Campaign Against Hunger at the St. Paul and St. Andrew United Methodist Church on West 86th Street. “We have a very strong local community,” she said. Barbara D’Elia, 69, who in 2011 bought a two-bedroom co-op for $860,000 in the southern 80s, near the American Museum of Natural History , said she became acquainted with the West 80s while visiting her adult daughter nearby. “I thought, ‘Hmm, it’s full of energy — I should think about moving here.’ ” Though she was born in the Bronx and spent her childhood in Brooklyn, Ms. D’Elia said, she had lived most of her life in the Washington, D.C., area while working for the Internal Revenue Service, from which she is now retired. Her daughter has since moved to Chelsea, Ms. D’Elia said, but she has no regrets. She takes her 4-year-old granddaughter to the natural history museum, her dog to Central Park and herself to Lincoln Center and Carnegie Hall. Three times a week, she plays bridge on the East Side. “I cut across the park,” she said. “I couldn’t be in a better place.” What You’ll Find The West 80s is largely a quiet neighborhood of stately older apartment buildings and townhouses, bustling bookstores and cultural institutions. It stretches from West 80th up to West 90th Street, and from Central Park West to Riverside Park. Broadway is its most vibrant commercial street, beginning at West 80th Street with Zabar’s , the food emporium. Across the street is Westsider Rare and Used Books , and two blocks north, a Barnes & Noble presents events with notable authors. Book Culture on Columbus , an independent store, lies two blocks east. The area is “relatively quiet in terms of construction,” said Helen Rosenthal, the local New York City Council member. The Romanesque Revival West Park Presbyterian Church , at 86th Street and Amsterdam Avenue, was designated a landmark in 2010, she said, after activists lobbied for that status to block a proposed residential tower at the site. The church website lists seven arts groups there; one is Soledad Barrio and Noche Flamenca , performing through Jan. 23. Other cultural institutions in the neighborhood include Ballet Hispanico , based on West 89th Street, and the Bard Graduate Center , which has a gallery in a townhouse on West 86th Street. The American Museum of Natural History is surrounded by Theodore Roosevelt Park , which stretches from West 77th Street to West 81st Street and from Central Park West to Columbus Avenue. Image 101 WEST 80TH STREET, #8A A one-bedroom one-bath co-op with an extra room, listed at $1.15 million. (917) 747-9792 Credit Karsten Moran for The New York Times What You’ll Pay Prices have risen steeply in the West 80s in recent years, said Edward F. Joseph, an agent with Brown Harris Stevens. “There are not a lot of bargains,” he said. The median price for a studio rose 39 percent, to $470,000 in 2015 from $337,500 in 2011, based on figures developed by his firm. The median one-bedroom increased 16 percent, to $718,000 from $617,000, over the same period, he said, while two-bedrooms edged up 24 percent, to $1.45 million from nearly $1.17 million. For three or more bedrooms, the five-year change was 39 percent, to $3.6 million from nearly $2.59 million. In a StreetEasy.com search on Jan. 7, the cheapest studio for rent was $1,750 a month. On the upper end, a three-bedroom two-and-a-half-bath duplex in a townhouse was $12,500. What to Do Liz Brooks, 45, who has lived in a four-bedroom three-and-a-half bath condo with three terraces since 2009 (for which she and her husband, David, a lawyer, paid about $5 million), finds plenty to do with their four children, ages 17, 15, 11 and 3. All have participated in West Side Little League and the West Side Soccer League. They also take science classes at the natural history museum and visit the Children’s Museum of Manhattan , which offers workshops and exhibits, on West 83rd. Margery Westin, 66, a retired pet photographer who lives with her cat in a rental apartment, likes the free Shakespeare and other entertainment in the summer, including at the West Side Community Garden on West 89th Street, the Soldiers’ and Sailors’ Monument along Riverside Drive at West 89th and the Delacorte Theater in Central Park at about West 80th. Restaurants range from old favorites like Barney Greengrass for deli fare to newer spots like Jacob’s Pickles for comfort food like biscuits and fried chicken. Image 599 WEST END AVENUE, #4A A two-bedroom one-bath corner co-op in a prewar elevator building, listed at $799,000. (646) 298-4892. Credit Karsten Moran for The New York Times The Schools Most West 80s students are zoned for Public School 9 Sarah Anderson on West 84th Street or P.S. 166 , the Richard Rodgers School of the Arts and Technology, on West 89th Street. P.S. 9 has about 613 students in prekindergarten through Grade 5. According to the 2014-15 School Quality Snapshot, 72 percent met state standards in English, compared with 30 percent citywide, and 81 percent met the standards in math, compared with 39 percent. At P.S. 166, about 612 students attend kindergarten through Grade 5. In the school quality snapshot, 69 percent met state standards in English and 75 percent did so in math. Some students in the lower West 80s are zoned for P.S. 87 William T. Sherman on West 78th Street, where about 855 students are in Grades pre-K through 5; 73 percent met state standards in English and 78 percent in math. The Commute The B and C subway lines stop along Central Park West at West 81st and West 86th. The 1 stops at Broadway and West 86th. Buses include the crosstown M86 and M79 and the M5, M7, M10, M11 and M104. The History The Soldiers’ and Sailors’ Monument, a 100-foot-tall white marble temple, sits on a hill along Riverside Drive. A city and state landmark, it commemorates Union soldiers and sailors of the Civil War. It was unveiled on Decoration Day in 1902, after a parade of Civil War veterans up Riverside Drive. With its plaza overlooking the Hudson River, it still hosts an annual observance of what is now called Memorial Day.  For weekly email updates on residential real estate news, sign up here . Follow us on Twitter: @nytrealestate . A version of this article appears in print on , on Page RE 7 of the New York edition with the headline: An Aesthetic of Its Own . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              