   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Pro Basketball Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by N.B.A.’s Coveted Trait: Well-Tuned Ears Image The rapper Drake with DeMar DeRozan of the Raptors after a January game against the Nets. Credit Chris Young/The Canadian Press, via Associated Press By  Corban Goble May 3, 2014 It’s no secret that rap and the N.B.A. have a long history, from Shaq and the Fu-Schnickens to Iman Shumpert rapping Migos’ street hit “Versace” to Drake and Jay Z sitting courtside with team owners. And now N.B.A. players are grading one another on a new metric, one that has nothing to do with advanced statistical analysis: taste in rap. Through music apps like Songza or Pandora, and the ocean of free downloads on mixtape search engines like DatPiff or LiveMixtapes, the search for new, unheralded music has become the league’s fastest-growing pastime. Perhaps no team has forged a deeper connection with hip-hop than the Portland Trail Blazers, who advanced to the second round when their Game 6 win eliminated the Houston Rockets on Friday. During the season, Blazers players took turns curating pregame playlists, which were rotated on the Rose Garden speakers. (It’s safe to say stadium fare like Pitbull’s “Timber” was shelved in favor of something from Rick Ross’s recent album “Mastermind” or an up-tempo track from the Philadelphia rapper Meek Mill.) Some of the N.B.A.’s most avid music fans have turned their Twitter feeds into of-the-moment reviews. The Utah Jazz reserve Brandon Rush, for one, reports on new songs and albums as soon as they hit the web in short, emoji-filled bursts. (The new album from the Atlanta rapper Future earned two flame symbols, high praise from Rush.) In the locker room, being ahead of the curve is a source of pride. Blazers forward Thomas Robinson, the team’s resident music buff, favors the squeaky-voiced Washington rapper Shy Glizzy and “Money Baby,” a single from the Atlanta artist K Camp. “I’m always the guy people are asking for when it comes to new music,” said Robinson, who grew up in Washington and speaks as passionately about hip-hop as he does about the playoffs. He credited himself and his teammate Will Barton for enlivening the Blazers’ locker room with the music of Atlanta’s Rich Homie Quan, whose single “Type of Way” became a runaway success in the sports world . “If there’s a new artist and I just like the song, then I go to YouTube and keep clicking” on related videos, Robinson said. In January, two Atlanta rappers released an underground mixtape called “Black Portland” that used the Blazers’ logo as the cover art. The rappers, Young Thug and Bloody Jay, said they were inspired by the Trail Blazers’ brand of gritty, tough basketball. In Oklahoma, there is quite likely no place more enthusiastic about the latest hip-hop than the locker room of the Thunder, who entered Saturday tied, 3-3, in their series with the Memphis Grizzlies. “It’s a topic of a lot of our discussion,” Oklahoma City guard Reggie Jackson said. “We always joke, especially with a young team, of who has the superyoung feel and who is listening to a bunch of nonsense nowadays.” The most popular song for the Thunder has been Beyoncé and Jay Z’s hit “Drunk in Love,” followed by “Who Do You Love?” by Y.G., a favorite of Russell Westbrook’s. “You can find music on at any time,” Jackson said. “It’s a fun environment to be around.” Jackson, who said he finds new music on movie soundtracks and listens to a lot of J. Cole, acknowledged he was not the team’s expert. “Our music gurus are usually Jeremy Lamb and Russell Westbrook,” Jackson said. Kevin Durant “might come up with something new,” he added. “Someone might bring in a cut from home, or their area. They have their little hometown swag.” And for N.B.A. stars, it is a rite of passage of sorts to be mentioned by a rapper, like Drake (“H-Town my second home like my name was James Harden”) or Jay Z (“It’s not even close, just leave it alone/I’m Michael Jordan, I play for the team I own”). But Durant’s relationship with a rapper named Lil B, an Internet icon and prolific mixtape artist, is of a different nature. Before the 2011 playoffs, Durant wrote on Twitter that he was not a fan of Lil B, also known as the Based God. Lil B responded by placing a curse on Durant . It did not keep the Thunder from an N.B.A. finals berth the following year, though talk of the curse has spiked during their bumpy playoff run. Athletes once used musicians to establish credibility, but it can work the other way around. Lil B, who has mentioned Durant in several songs, recently pledged to make the N.B.A. (He is 5 feet 6 inches and is not considered a prospect, though he did attend an open tryout for Golden State’s Development League affiliate.) At 25, Durant often plays the role of the vintage connoisseur. If his teammates prefer Y.G. and Beyoncé, he’ll often turn up hits from the ’90s, like Ginuwine’s “Pony” as well as music from the old-school rap revivalist Jay Electronica. “K. D. likes to joke with some of the younger cats,” Jackson, 24, said. “Something might come on, and he’ll be like, ‘Now that’s music, young fella.’ ” A version of this article appears in print on , on Page SP 7 of the New York edition with the headline: N.B.A.’s Coveted Trait: Well-Tuned Ears . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              