   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Fashion & Style Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by For Joan Rivers’s Doctor, Fame Delivers Its Bill Image The death of Joan Rivers, top center, after medical procedures at Yorkville Endoscopy, bottom center, grabbed headlines and placed Dr. Gwen Korovin, far left, under scrutiny. Ms. Rivers’s fans responded with an outpouring of sympathy and her daughter, Melissa, bottom right, at the funeral with her son, Cooper, has retained legal counsel to determine the facts. Credit Lee Brown/Splash News, via Corbis (Korovin); Lionel Cironneau/Associated Press (Joan Rivers); Yana Paskova for The New York Times (fans’ signs and Yorkville Endoscopy); Damon Winter/The New York Times (Melissa Rivers) By  Jacob Bernstein Nov. 5, 2014 The first things you notice as you walk through the small hallway leading to the Upper East Side office of Dr. Gwen Korovin, a prominent ear, nose and throat specialist, are the mounted platinum records. To the left, one earned by Ariana Grande, commemorating sales of two million copies of her single “The Way.” To the right, one from Celine Dion, given to Dr. Korovin after Ms. Dion broke 50 million in total record sales. In the center of the room, going down a column, are photos of Dr. Korovin with some of her famous clients and friends. There she is with Martha Stewart. There she is with Luciano Pavarotti. There she is with Julie Andrews. But there is no sign at all of the woman who has become known, posthumously, as the most famous of all of Dr. Korovin’s celebrity patients: Joan Rivers. As has now been widely reported , Dr. Korovin was with Ms. Rivers at Yorkville Endoscopy on East 93rd Street on the morning of Aug. 28, helping out on what was supposed to a routine medical procedure after the comedian had complained of hoarseness. While under sedation, and undergoing two procedures, a laryngoscopy (an examination of her voice box and vocal cords) and an endoscopy (which involves looking at the upper digestive system), Ms. Rivers went into cardiac arrest. Paramedics rushed her from the clinic to Mount Sinai Hospital, where she was kept on life support until she died a week later , on Sept. 4, at 81. Soon, Dr. Korovin, 56, was tabloid fodder, accused of behaving unprofessionally and perhaps even contributing to the cause of Ms. Rivers’s death. Perhaps the most serious allegation, according to published reports, was that, in addition to the endoscopy, performed by the clinic’s medical director, Dr. Lawrence B. Cohen, Dr. Korovin performed the laryngoscopy on Ms. Rivers, even though she was not authorized to practice at the clinic. (Dr. Cohen has since resigned as the clinic’s medical director .) In addition, CNN reported that staff members at the clinic told investigators that Dr. Korovin had also used her smartphone to snap a selfie while Ms. Rivers was under anesthesia, telling someone in the room that Ms. Rivers “will think this is funny.” That claim quickly went viral, even as a person described by CNN as close to Dr. Korovin denied to the network that she had taken a selfie or performed an unauthorized procedure. According to the medical examiner’s report, issued on Oct. 16, the cause of death was “anoxic encephalopathy due to hypoxic arrest during laryngoscopy and upper gastrointestinal endoscopy with Propofol sedation.” ( Propofol , which was linked to Michael Jackson’s death in 2009, is an anesthetic known for having a high risk factor for respiratory arrest.) The report also said that an investigation by the medical examiner’s office found that Ms. Rivers’s death was “a predictable complication of medical therapy.” Image Dr. Korovin was with Ms. Rivers at Yorkville Endoscopy (shown here) on East 93rd Street on the morning of Aug. 28, helping out on what was supposed to a routine medical procedure after the comedian had complained of hoarseness. Credit Yana Paskova for The New York Times Ms. Rivers’s daughter, Melissa Rivers, recently retained Ben Rubinowitz of the New York law firm Gair, Gair, Conason, Steigman, Mackauf, Bloom & Rubinowitz, which specializes in personal-injury suits, to fully determine the facts and circumstances surrounding the death of her mother. Except for a brief statement the afternoon the medical examiner’s report was released (reading, in part, “We continue to be saddened by our tragic loss”), Melissa Rivers declined to comment further. It’s unclear what liability, if any, Dr. Korovin may face if Melissa Rivers pursues action against either her or the clinic at which her mother’s medical procedures took place. The New York State Department of Health is conducting an investigation into Ms. Rivers’s death, and the Office of Medical Professional Conduct, a division of the health department, may do so as well. Dr. Korovin has declined all requests for comment, as has her lawyer, Michael S. Kelton , though he delivered a statement last month that described Dr. Korovin as a “highly experienced, board-certified otolaryngologist,” who “is respected and admired by her peers in the medical community and she is revered by her patients.” One of her longtime patients, the actor Joel Grey, who said he has gone to Dr. Korovin for 20 years, echoed those sentiments. “I only know her to be prudent and careful and loving, and there was no hour of the day I couldn’t call her,” Mr. Grey said. “I never saw her do anything that was less than caring and considered.” As for what happened on Aug. 28, Mr. Grey offered one explanation: “I think she is so devoted to her patients and was called upon to be there and may have just overextended herself.” He added: “She sees all my friends. Every single one.” No matter the final resolution in this matter, the tabloid nature of Ms. Rivers’s death and the unwelcome scrutiny it brought to Dr. Korovin suggest that a practice largely built upon the power of celebrity can also become victim to its downside. Anna Rose , the daughter of the Hollywood and Broadway composer Alan Menken and an up-and-coming performer in her own right, has been a patient of Dr. Korovin for more than four years, going back to an operation in 2010 to take care of a sinus problem that was making it impossible for her to sing. Ms. Rose said that she grew fond of Dr. Korovin, who has about her a kind of mothering quality that differentiated her from other doctors. “She really holds your hand,” Ms. Rose said, adding that it was reassuring to see pictures of the famous people she had treated, many of whom had scrawled words of tribute on their head shots. “She’s the best of the best.” That’s how her patients routinely spoke of Dr. Korovin: the best of the best. It was heard constantly, from pop stars, movie actors and Broadway performers alike. “Gwen is the patron saint of Broadway actors and singers,” Patti LuPone once told The Daily News . Her celebrity clients seemed to love Dr. Korovin, who was calm and conservative about surgery but also had no problem going to battle with show producers, letting them know that she wasn’t going to patch up performers with steroids and clear them to perform merely for the sake of the box office. Image From left, clockwise: Joel Grey, Billy Porter, Hugh Jackman and Ariana Grande, all patients. Credit Clockwise: Dave Allocca/StarPix, via Associated Press. Ruby Washington/The New York Times. Kevin Winter/Getty Images For Cbs Radio Inc. Chris Pizzello/Invision, via Chris Pizzello/Invision/AP “She’s really present to the artist and not the commerce,” said the Tony Award-winning actor Billy Porter (“Kinky Boots”), another of Dr. Korovin’s patients. “She takes time and care and tells you the truth and makes you feel comfortable with decisions that might make money people angry.” The sharp turn her career has taken stunned patients and friends, though many seem to be rallying around her. Ken Sunshine, the longtime public relations agent and a patient of hers for many years, said: “She’s heartsick and devastated. It’s the single worst thing that’s ever happened to her professionally.” She is also having a rough time, personally, dealing with the death of Ms. Rivers (whom she had treated for more than 17 years), said William Riley, a prominent voice coach. “To lose her close friend was very, very difficult,” he said. The journey to that Upper East Side doctor’s office, with the celebrity clients who filled its waiting room, began in Brooklyn, where Ms. Korovin (whose father, Hal, briefly played professional basketball) grew up. She attended Cornell University’s College of Agriculture and Life Sciences, where she got her degree in 1980. After that, she went on to SUNY Upstate Medical University at Syracuse for her medical degree. Upon moving back to New York City, she interned at Lenox Hill Hospital in Manhattan, where she met Dr. Wilbur J. Gould , considered to be a wizard by many in entertainment and about as fond of dropping his clients’ last names as he was looking at their larynxes. In 1960, Dr. Gould helped John F. Kennedy with his voice problems while he campaigned for the presidency. In 1966, Dr. Gould treated President Lyndon B. Johnson for a benign polyp in his throat. Both of their pictures had places of honor on the walls of his office, which were as celebrity-filled as the Carnegie Deli. One day, Dolly Parton could be spotted walking through the waiting room; on another, Cher and Katharine Hepburn chatting away as they waited for their appointments. In 1994, Dr. Gould died, and Dr. Korovin, at 35, took over his practice, retaining many of his other famous clients, among them Frank Sinatra and Linda Ronstadt. Dr. Korovin was suited to celebrities in a number of ways. First, she had a canny understanding of their fragile psyches. Image Dr. Korovin, second from right, at a benefit in April with, from left, William Lauder, Cindy Butts, Stephen Strick and Neal Fox. Credit Patrick McMullan/Patrick McMullan “People assume that because celebrities are famous and wealthy that they are confident and secure,” said Dr. Robert Sataloff , a professor and the chairman of the Ear, Nose and Throat Department at Drexel University in Philadelphia, an organization dedicated to voice research and medicine. “And often that is not the case. She understood that.” She also looked (over 5 feet 9 inches without heels) and dressed the part. “There was a kind of glamour about her,” Mr. Grey said. Mr. Porter added: “She’s always in the cutest pump, with a pencil skirt and a sassy Chanel something or other. She’s a fantastic dresser, which matters to somebody like me. I love that.”  Less famous actors, and those outside show business, went to her, too. T. Oliver Reid , a veteran Broadway actor, first saw Dr. Korovin when he was in the ensemble of “Kiss Me, Kate” and had a tracheal infection. Mr. Porter became a patient while he was in the ensemble of “Miss Saigon.” (Disclosure: I was briefly a patient of Dr. Korovin’s in 2010, when a plastic tip from my headphones got lodged in my ear. While I was in the waiting room filling out paperwork, I looked up and saw Bruce Springsteen standing there. In the examining room, a nurse told me that my appointment had been sandwiched between those of Mr. Springsteen and Elvis Costello.) Former and current patients say that Dr. Korovin was often available to see them on short notice, despite the demands for her time. And over the years, she grew close to many of them, seeing them not just in her office on 77th Street, but also in their dressing rooms. She attended their openings and was photographed on the red carpet at benefits for the Roundabout Theater. Occasionally, she would ask clients when they were going to send over an autographed picture, as she did with Mr. Porter when he finally became famous. “I keep forgetting to give it to her,” he said. “But I don’t make copies of them anymore.” It is not unusual for doctors in 2014 to rely on their patients for publicity. Anyone who has been to the Hospital for Special Surgery and seen the photographs of prominent New York athletes lining the walls could tell you that. Dr. Kenneth Prager , a professor of medicine and the director of medical ethics at Columbia University, said he saw no real issue with doing that, as long as the patients gave permission. “These are patients who have capacity,” he said. “They are intelligent people. They know their picture is going to be used. They know why it’s going to be used.” But Arthur Caplan , the head of the Division of Medical Ethics at NYU Langone Medical Center, said that he was uncomfortable with the overt advertising of one’s patients. “It borders on the ethically suspect,” he said. “I have the same attitude I have when I see one of these athletes blessing a mineral water or a vitamin supplement or a granola bar.” Image Dr. Korovin with Joy Behar. Credit Steve Mack/Getty Images On Monday, Aug. 25, Ms. Rose, the young singer, went to Dr. Korovin for a visit. She had a cold and was concerned because she was about to go on tour. Dr. Korovin was in fine spirits that day, talking about Ms. Grande, whose platinum record had just been put up on the wall. Two days later, on the evening of Aug. 27, Ms. Rivers performed a gig at a cabaret club, then went to Amaranth on the Upper East Side with her friend Jay Redack for a late bite. It was just a few days before Labor Day, and the sort of people who go to fancy restaurants like this were mostly out of town. Nevertheless, Ms. Rivers was determined to look great, decked out in a sequin coat and a rhinestone necklace. As ever, she barely ate a thing. While there, she bumped into Blaine Trump and Ms. Trump’s boyfriend, Steve Simon, who were seated nearby with the publicist Peggy Siegal . Ms. Trump finished dinner, then walked over to Ms. Rivers’s table, where the two women began chatting, according to Ms. Siegal. Ms. Siegal said that Ms. Rivers mentioned that she had a surgical procedure scheduled for the next morning and that, though she wasn’t thrilled about it, it was one that she had had performed before. “Same doctor, same clinic, same procedure as two years ago,” Ms. Siegal added. No one seemed overly concerned. After all, Ms. Rivers’s fondness for cosmetic procedures and her resilience were known to all. Why would this be any different? Early the next morning, Ms. Rivers went to the clinic. A female doctor, carrying what The New York Times later described as a bag, arrived soon after. The staff reportedly did not recognize her, but she was nevertheless allowed into the operating room . That doctor was later identified as Gwen Korovin. In the weeks that have followed the death, many of Dr. Korovin’s patients appear to be remaining loyal. Mr. Grey said he had recently stopped by Dr. Korovin’s office to offer moral support and tell her that he still has faith in her. James Earl Jones, seconded those sentiments. In an email, he said she retains his “total confidence and trust.” Nathan Lane expressed similar support, calling her “the best at what she does.” But others fear her reputation may be irrevocably damaged. “I haven’t called her yet to talk about this,” said one patient who has known Dr. Korovin for many years and who said he has referred numerous clients to her but spoke on condition of anonymity because he did not want to publicly discuss a case that is still being investigated. “I don’t know what to say.” Ms. Siegal added: “Joan was incredibly smart and focused and took incredibly good care of herself. The whole thing is a tragedy for Gwen Korovin, too. One mishap has destroyed her life.” Mr. Porter, the “Kinky Boots” star, said, “The kneejerk reaction is to blame somebody,” adding, “Sometimes, nobody’s to blame.” “If the evidence shows that someone’s to blame,” he continued, “fine to rake people over the coals. But not before you can even dissect what happened. That’s something I’ve never been a party to.” A version of this article appears in print on , on Page E 1 of the New York edition with the headline: Fame Delivers Its Bill . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              