   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index U.S. Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Health Care Providers Scramble to Meet New Disaster Readiness Rule By  Sheri Fink Sept. 9, 2016 An estimated 72,315 American health care providers and suppliers — from hospitals and nursing homes to dialysis facilities and care homes for those with intellectual disabilities — will have a little over a year to meet federal disaster preparedness requirements completed this week by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. The new rule is aimed at preventing the severe breakdown in patient care that followed disasters including Hurricane Katrina and Hurricane Sandy , while also strengthening the ability to provide services during other types of emergencies, such as pandemics and terrorist attacks. The rule is unusual in that it has provisions for 17 different provider types, among them those that patients rely on to live at home, like outpatient surgery sites, physical therapy offices and home health agencies. The rule “will make it more likely that facilities will be able to stay open and able to care for patients, and if they need to close or stop work temporarily, get back up and able to care for patients quickly,” said Dr. Nicole Lurie , the assistant secretary for preparedness and response at the Department of Health and Human Services. “The need for patient care doesn’t stop because streets are flooded or trees are down. In fact disasters often increase the need for health care services.” While the vast majority of organizations have had to adhere to at least some emergency preparedness requirements for accreditation, others were not subject to any, including hundreds of residential psychiatric facilities, nearly 200 community mental health centers, dozens of organ procurement organizations and nearly 4,000 outpatient hospices, which treat patients with limited life expectancies. “It’s going to have a big impact on these facilities,” said Emily Lord, the executive director of Healthcare Ready, a nonprofit focused on preparedness that provided feedback to the government on the implications of the rule. According to the government, the cost of putting the rule into effect will be just over $279 million. Others believe it will be more. “They didn’t account for any time to get up to speed,” Ms. Lord said. The requirements may be particularly onerous for smaller facilities. “Funding to offset preparedness activities has decreased,” said Barbara B. Citarella, the president of RBC Limited, a health care consulting group in Staatsburg, N.Y. “My concern is that compliance for some providers, especially home care and hospice, will be financially impossible.” The final requirements acknowledged those concerns, but argued that preparedness investments would overall be beneficial. “Planning for the protection and care of patients, clients, residents, and staff during an emergency or a disaster is a good business practice,” the rule said. The original proposal for the requirements, released in December 2013, drew nearly 400 responses during a formal comment period, primarily from health care providers and industry groups. While they generally supported the goals of the rule, they attacked certain requirements as costly and unnecessary. At least some of those provisions were significantly modified in the final version. Chief among them was a proposal that hospitals and nursing homes test their backup power systems for a minimum of four hours every year at the full load needed in an emergency, rather than the current standard of once every three years. Generators have failed catastrophically in hospitals and nursing homes around the country during prolonged power outages, endangering patients and leading to chaotic evacuations. However, the government removed the enhanced testing proposal, stating that there was not enough evidence it “would ensure that generators would withstand all disasters.” That change was welcomed by health care industry groups, including the American Hospital Association. Instead, institutions will need to meet National Fire Protection Association standards for testing generator equipment and will still need to plan for what to do when power is lost. The new rule was released along with technical resources to help providers implement it. Dr. Lurie said expertise and assistance should also come from health care coalitions — roughly 500 groups around the country that “bring together diverse and often competitive health care organizations to prepare for and respond to disasters,” she said. “The entire rule stresses a community approach — we can’t approach this one facility at a time.” “I am glad to see the recognition that disasters are not just an emergency department problem,” said Dr. David Marcozzi, an associate professor at the University of Maryland School of Medicine and former director of a federal health care preparedness program. “Simply, it’s a quality and safety issue.” A version of this article appears in print on , on Page A 14 of the New York edition with the headline: Health Care Providers Scramble to Meet New Disaster Preparedness Rule . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Related Coverage U.S. Officials Move to End Duplicate Health Care Coverage Aug. 19, 2016 Image As Insurers Like Aetna Balk, U.S. Makes New Push to Bolster Health Care Act Aug. 17, 2016 Image Doctors Are Improperly Billing Some on Medicare, U.S. Says July 30, 2016 Image Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              