   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index U.S. Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by A Look Inside the Senate’s Late Night The Capitol was brimming with tension as Republicans tried to rally support in their latest attempt to repeal Obamacare. By  Tanner Curtis July 28, 2017 Image Credit Gabriella Demczuk for The New York Times The only certainty for senators on Thursday as they headed toward a showdown vote on a  health care overhaul was that it would be a late night. Indeed, not until 2 a.m. Friday did the Senate finally stand down, after three Republicans voted against the so-called skinny repeal to reject their party’s push — and a yearslong promise — to scuttle former President Barack Obama’s signature domestic achievement. Image Credit Justin Sullivan/Getty Images Early in the evening, a group of Republican senators — including Lindsey Graham of South Carolina, below right, and Ron Johnson of Wisconsin, below left — told a news conference that they would not support the “skinny repeal” bill. Mr. Graham called the stripped-down proposal a “disaster” and a “fraud” as a replacement for the current law. Had it succeeded, the bill would have merely served as a vehicle for future negotiations with the House: It was not considered viable on its own. Image Credit Gabriella Demczuk for The New York Times Image Credit Gabriella Demczuk for The New York Times As senators prepared for grueling hours of debate and votes, their aides hustled to arm them with props and snacks. Below, an aide to Senator Dick Durbin of Illinois, the minority whip, carried a poster toward the Senate chamber. Image Credit Justin Sullivan/Getty Images The hustle and bustle in the Capitol’s hallways faded into stillness as the hours dragged by. Aides, glued to their cellphones as they waited for instructions, paced or sat; others hauled in boxes of pizza. Image Credit Gabriella Demczuk for The New York Times Image Credit Gabriella Demczuk for The New York Times Television crews bird-dogged passing senators with questions and quips. One monitor showed an image of the White House, where President Trump tweeted a message of support. “Go Republican Senators, Go! Get there after waiting for 7 years. Give America great healthcare!” Image Credit Gabriella Demczuk for The New York Times The events played out 52 years after Congress approved legislation creating the Medicare and Medicaid programs, which President Lyndon B. Johnson signed into law on July 30, 1965. A bust of Mr. Johnson, who had served earlier as Senate majority leader and as vice president, is on display in the Capitol. Image Credit Gabriella Demczuk for The New York Times The expansion of Medicaid under the current health law became a sticking point: Several Republicans worried that their constituents would lose medical care if it were rolled back. Senator Patrick Leahy, Democrat of Vermont, watched the proceedings on television in his hideaway office near the Senate floor. Mr. Leahy said other senators often stopped by to chat during late-night sessions. His aide said that Thursday night reminded him of the hours Mr. Leahy had spent in the hideaway during the 2010 debate over Mr. Obama’s health law — although the tone was certainly different then. Image Credit Gabriella Demczuk for The New York Times Image Credit Gabriella Demczuk for The New York Times Democratic staff members gathered in a room near the Senate floor named after Mr. Johnson to watch the final vote. After the bill failed, 51 to 49, Senator Chuck Schumer of New York, the minority leader, pleaded early Friday for a new bipartisan process to improve the nation’s health care system. Image Credit Gabriella Demczuk for The New York Times Earlier in the week, days after learning he had brain cancer, Senator John McCain flew back to Washington to vote to begin debate on the health bill. By Thursday, however, Mr. McCain, below center, said he would vote against the slimmed-down repeal. He and two other Republicans cast the decisive votes to shut down the overhaul. Image Credit Gabriella Demczuk for The New York Times Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              