   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Live Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Sunlight May Reduce Risk of Nearsightedness By  Nicholas Bakalar Dec. 1, 2016 Image Exposure to sunlight may reduce the risk for nearsightedness, a new study reports. Researchers recruited 371 men and women with nearsightedness, or myopia, and 2,797 without. Their average age was 72. They gave them eye examinations, took blood samples and interviewed them about their health and behavior over the years, estimating exposure to ultraviolet B rays. The study, in JAMA Ophthalmology , found that those with the highest UVB exposure, especially as teenagers and young adults, had about a 30 percent lower risk for myopia than those with the lowest exposure. Exposure to sunlight increases vitamin D levels, but those did not correlate with nearsightedness. They also found that more schooling increased the risk of nearsightedness. Those in the highest one-third in years of education had more than double the risk of myopia compared with those in the lowest one-third. The reason for the effect, which was independent of UVB exposure, remains unknown. The researchers were surprised to find that people with the highest blood levels of lutein, a nutrient found in leafy vegetables, had a 43 percent reduced risk of nearsightedness compared with those with the lowest levels. “Spending time outdoors is good advice for trying to reduce the chance of getting myopia,” said the senior author, Astrid E. Fletcher of the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, though she advised against spending time outdoors in the middle of the day, when skin cancer risks increase. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page D 4 of the New York edition with the headline: Body: Sunlight May Be Good for Eyes . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Related Coverage Computer Vision Syndrome Affects Millions May 30, 2016 Image Think Like a Doctor: Strange Vision June 4, 2015 Image Vision Training to Boost Sports Performance May 26, 2014 Image Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              