   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Weddings Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Arielle Carpenter, Jonathan Rogg Image Credit Iman Shahkarami Dec. 17, 2017 Arielle Halee Carpenter and Dr. Jonathan Gedalia Rogg were married Dec. 16 by Cantor Ann Turnoff at the Embassy Suites Deerfield Beach Resort & Spa in Florida. Mrs. Rogg, 30, is the health care innovation lead at the Texas Medical Center Innovation Institute in Houston, where she plans curriculum and programming to assist early stage health care companies with growth and development. She graduated cum laude from Tufts, where she also received a master of public health. She received an M.B.A. from the Collège des Ingénieurs in Paris. She is the daughter of Amy B. Carpenter and Dr. Neal M. Carpenter of Boca Raton, Fla. The bride’s father, an emergency doctor, retired from the Delray Medical Center in Delray Beach, Fla. Her mother, a lawyer, is the director of the Patten Family Companies, a real estate development company in Williamstown, Mass. Dr. Rogg, 35, is also an emergency doctor and an assistant professor of emergency medicine and the director of emergency department operations at the University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston McGovern Medical School. He graduated from M.I.T. and received a medical degree from Tufts and an M.B.A. from Harvard. He is a son of Ruth S. Rogg of Clearwater, Fla., and William N. Rogg of West Palm Beach, Fla. The groom’s mother, now retired, was an elementary math and reading tutor in Tampa, Fla. His father, a lawyer, retired from private practice in Montreal. The couple met in 2013 through the dating app OkCupid. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page ST 18 of the New York edition with the headline: Arielle Carpenter, Jonathan Rogg . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              