   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Opinion Supported by Letters Doctor, Help Me Understand This ... Feb. 16, 2014 Image Credit Bjorn Rune Lie  To the Editor: Re “ Lost in Clinical Translation ” (Bedside column, Sunday Review, Feb. 9): Theresa Brown’s essay rightly points out the difference between what is said and what is processed in medical interactions, but this is true of all interpersonal communications. In my 30 years seeing children with blood diseases and cancer, the comprehension gap became obvious because the relationships are long term, not transactional. I routinely told the parents of my patients at the time of diagnosis that I would repeat myself not because I thought that they weren’t smart but because they were in shock. We would both be fortunate if they retained 20 percent of what was said. Consent forms, incidentally, are not helpful; comprehension is not affected by what patients have in writing. The father of one of my patients reminded me of my comment about repeating myself six weeks after his daughter’s diagnosis of leukemia and said he was ready to hear it all again. We spent four hours on a Saturday revisiting all the things we had discussed earlier. He took notes, asked good questions and was able to be a full partner in his daughter’s care. Continuity of care, empowered patients and time are essential but endangered. SUSAN B. SHURIN Washington, Feb. 9, 2014  The writer is a pediatrician and oncologist. To the Editor: Theresa Brown’s Bedside column about physicians’ poor communication with patients gives the impression that this is a pervasive problem. I do not agree. As a fellow in neonatal perinatal medicine at the Children’s National Medical Center 40 years ago, I often discussed with colleagues the appropriate way to talk about the problems of newborns with their parents. This included sitting down, talking and listening to see if parents understood, and having a nurse in the room to hear the conversation. Over the years I have had the privilege of teaching and working with young physicians and nurses who had excellent communication skills. IRA STEVEN WERTHEIMER Margate City, N.J., Feb. 9, 2014 To the Editor: Lost-in-translation conversations between health care professionals and patients occur every day in all settings of care. Medical schools must bear some of the blame for these communication problems. It starts with the admissions process. Medical schools should assess applicants not only for academic proficiency and cognitive intelligence but also for emotional intelligence, or E.Q. This includes “soft skills” like empathy, communication style, self-awareness and conflict management. Certain soft skills can improve with teaching and coaching. Medical schools should integrate such training into their curriculums. This is not just about improving bedside manner. Research has consistently shown that success in any profession is often predicated more on E.Q. than on technical proficiency. More important, as Theresa Brown points out, effective patient-doctor interactions can lead to improved clinical outcomes. BARRY K. HERMAN Radnor, Pa., Feb. 9, 2014  The writer is a child and adolescent psychiatrist. To the Editor: In 2007, I was visiting my mother in the hospital and correcting homework while she slept. A nurse asked me what class I taught. “Speaking and Listening for the Professional,” I said. “Oh!” she exclaimed. “We need you to come here. Nobody listens to anybody.” She went on to tell me about how difficult it is for doctors and nurses to communicate. I wasn’t surprised and then asked about the patients. She hadn’t thought about their listening skills. There is no question that any person under stress will have trouble being an effective listener. Then, if you add on top of that the difficulty that medical professionals have in finding the time to slow down and notice or ask if they have been understood, it magnifies the problem tenfold. BETH ROSEN New York, Feb. 9, 2014  The writer, a psychotherapist, teaches applied psychology in the CUNY School of Professional Studies Off-Campus College. To the Editor: Compartmentalization is the key to medicine, but as Theresa Brown suggests, it may be a double-edged sword. The intellectual energy essential to formulating a diagnosis and treatment plan often obscures the emotional intelligence required for empathic communication. After the rigorous work-up is complete and therapy is underway, it’s worthwhile for physicians to ask themselves, “Would I want to be my own doctor?” GEOFF RUBIN New York, Feb. 10, 2014  The writer is a resident in internal medicine at Columbia University. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page A 18 of the New York edition with the headline: Doctor, Help Me Understand This ... . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              