   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Corrections Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Corrections: May 27, 2015 May 27, 2015 INTERNATIONAL An article on Feb. 15 about an attack on a polio vaccination team in northwestern Pakistan misidentified the disease that was the target of a vaccination campaign used by the C.I.A. as a cover for an espionage operation that led to Osama bin Laden’s hideout in Abbottabad, Pakistan. The disease was hepatitis B, not polio. A reader pointed out the error in an email on May 12. NATIONAL Because of an editing error, an article on Thursday about a political scientist who is seeking a retraction of a study published in the journal Science, which suggested that gay political canvassers could change conservative voters’ views on same-sex marriage, erroneously included one news organization among those that had issued editors’ notes regarding their initial coverage of the study. NPR did not report on the study and has not posted such a note; the radio program “This American Life,” which is produced by Chicago Public Media and delivered to stations by PRX The Public Radio Exchange, did post a note. • An article on Tuesday about Harris Rosen’s largess for the troubled community of Tangelo Park, Fla., misstated Mr. Rosen’s marital status. He is divorced. NEW YORK An article on Monday about proposed legislation in Albany that would loosen restrictions on dogs at restaurants referred incorrectly to the position taken by Assemblyman Richard N. Gottfried. He has not made a decision on the bill; he does not oppose it. BUSINESS Because of an editing error, an article on Monday about Amazon’s decision to report revenue and pay taxes in several European countries, rather than funnel the earnings through Luxembourg, described incorrectly, in some copies, a battle over tech companies’ taxes in Europe. The battle is between European countries and American tech companies, not between European tech companies and their American counterparts. • The Wealth Matters column on Saturday, about on-call personal trainers, misspelled part of the name of the company of which Omar Amanat, whose trainer accompanies him on business trips, is the chairman. It is the Aman Resorts Group, not the Amman Resorts Group. THE ARTS The Books of The Times review on Tuesday, about “Fracture” by Philipp Blom, misstated a date in the book’s subtitle. As bibliographical information with the review correctly noted, it is “Life and Culture in the West, 1918-1938,” not “1919-1938.” • A dance review on Saturday about the performance artist Rebecca Patek’s “The Future Was Looking Better in the Past,” at the Chocolate Factory in Long Island City, referred incorrectly to a scene presented in audio with subtitles. While Ms. Patek has noted that it is ambiguous, it involves sex acts with anonymous men, not prostitution. • A Critic’s Notebook article on Tuesday about New York City Ballet, at the David H. Koch Theater, misspelled the given name of a soloist in “Raymonda Variations.” She is Kristen Segin, not Kristin. The Times welcomes comments and suggestions, or complaints about errors that warrant correction. Messages on news coverage can be e-mailed to nytnews@nytimes.com or left toll-free at 1-888-NYT-NEWS (1-888-698-6397). Comments on editorials may be e-mailed to letters@nytimes.com or faxed to (212) 556-3622. Readers dissatisfied with a response or concerned about the paper’s journalistic integrity may reach the public editor at public@nytimes.com or (212) 556-7652. For newspaper delivery questions: 1-800-NYTIMES (1-800-698-4637) or e-mail customercare@nytimes.com . A version of this article appears in print on , on Page A 2 of the National edition with the headline: Corrections . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              