   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index New York Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by New York City’s Flu Shot Mandate for Young Children Is Struck Down By  Marc Santora Dec. 17, 2015 A judge ruled on Thursday that the New York City health department could not require young children to be vaccinated for the flu to attend city-licensed preschools and day care centers, striking down one of the more ambitious public health initiatives of the Bloomberg administration. Justice Manuel J. Mendez of State Supreme Court in Manhattan said the city could not add influenza to the list of diseases requiring immunization without action by the State Legislature. Dr. Mary T. Bassett, the city’s health commissioner, said the decision would put thousands of children at unnecessary risk. “I am extremely disappointed by today’s decision,” Dr. Bassett said in a statement. “Influenza kills an average of 24,000 people each year in the United States, and the virus is spread easily in child care settings to children and their families. The vaccination requirement will save lives.” City health officials said they would appeal the ruling and continue to encourage parents to vaccinate their children against the flu. The requirement would have affected 150,000 children in city-licensed preschools and day care centers. Aaron Siri, a lawyer for the parents who filed the suit against the city, said the health department had greatly overstepped its authority. “Parents across the city who, in consultation with their doctors, made the decision that the risks outweighed the benefits for their particular child, had that right taken away from them by 11 unelected individuals sitting in the Board of Health right across the street,” Mr. Siri said at a news conference in Lower Manhattan. “If anybody is going to take away that right, it should be the elected representatives of this state.” The mandate was passed in the waning days of Michael R. Bloomberg’s tenure as mayor and was scheduled to take effect in January. It required children between the ages of 6 months and 59 months to be vaccinated by shot or mist. Fines for schools that did not follow the rule ranged from $200 to $2,000. The measure was approved unanimously by the Board of Health and generated little public discussion, overshadowed at the hearing by a proposal to ban large sodas. But the proposal soon met fierce opposition, with many parents resisting and saying that their doctors told them the vaccine was not needed. Some of the most vocal critics were those who believe vaccinations are linked to autism, although there is no scientific evidence that shots and the disorder are connected. The court ruling did not delve into the debate about vaccines. Rather, it found that the city had exceeded its authority by adding a disease to the list of those requiring immunization. New York State public health law mandates “immunization against poliomyelitis, mumps, measles, diphtheria, rubella, varicella, Haemophilus influenza type b, pertussis, tetanus, pneumococcal disease, meningococcal disease and hepatitis B.” If the city wants to require vaccination against the flu, the court said, lawmakers in Albany must vote to add it to the list. Connecticut and New Jersey require that children be immunized against the flu, and supporters of the mandate point to a recent study by the federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention of the impact in Connecticut, where immunization rates rose to 84 percent from 69 percent after the mandate was put in place. While statistics surrounding the flu vaccine’s efficacy are complicated because different strains of the disease circulate each year and can vary widely, the C.D.C. compared two years with the same influenza subtype (H3N2) before and after the mandate. In 2007-8, before the mandate, Connecticut had the third-highest rate of hospitalization for children under 4 years old with influenza-associated illnesses. In 2012-13, after it began requiring the vaccine, the state’s ranking dropped to seventh and recorded a 12 percent decrease in hospitalizations. Michelle Carroll, 44, one of the plaintiffs in the suit and the mother of a 4-year-old girl, said the ruling was a victory for parents. “It’s important for people to remember that vaccines are drugs and just like any other drug, not every vaccine is going to be right for every single child,” Ms. Carroll said. The ruling was important, she said, because it left “the decision about whether or not to vaccinate our smallest, youngest, most vulnerable citizens” with pediatricians and parents. Eli Rosenberg contributed reporting.  A version of this article appears in print on , on Page A 32 of the New York edition with the headline: Judge Halts City’s Flu-Shot Mandate for Children, Saying It Bypassed Albany . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              