   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Health Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Deadlier Flu Season Is Possible, C.D.C. Says By  Donald G. McNeil Jr. Dec. 4, 2014 This year’s flu season may be deadlier than usual, and this year’s flu vaccine is a relatively poor match to a new virus that is now circulating, federal health officials warned on Thursday. “Flu is unpredictable, but what we’ve seen thus far is concerning,” said Dr. Thomas R. Frieden, the director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention . The C.D.C. has alerted doctors to the problem and has urged them to prescribe antiviral drugs like Tamiflu to vulnerable patients with flu symptoms without waiting for a positive flu test. The season has only just begun, but 91 percent of the approximately 1,200 samples tested thus far are of the H3N2 subtype of influenza A, Dr. Frieden said. Almost all the rest were influenza B. There were almost no samples of the H1 subtype, a descendant of the 2009 swine flu strain. Years in which H3 subtypes are more common than H1 subtypes tend to lead to more hospitalizations and deaths, he added. Moreover, about half of those H3 subtypes — or about 45 percent of all the samples tested so far — are of a new H3 subtype that this season’s flu vaccine does not protect well against. The new subtype first appeared overseas in March, Dr. Frieden said. Because it was not found in many samples in the United States until September, it is too late to change the vaccine, he said. The flu vaccine can be grown in cell broths rather than in chicken eggs. That speeds up a process that once took at least six months — but it still takes about four months. The C.D.C. still recommends that all Americans get flu shots because they are as protective as usual against the older H3 strain, influenza B and the small numbers of H1. And they may provide at least a weak defense against the newer H3. But because of the increased danger from the H3 strain — and because B influenza strains can also cause serious illness — the C.D.C. recommends that patients with asthma , diabetes or lung or heart problems see a doctor at the first sign of a possible flu, and that doctors quickly prescribe antivirals like Tamiflu or Relenza. Those medications are “not miracle drugs,” Dr. Frieden said. The earlier they are given in the illness, the better they work, and all they usually do is shorten the illness by one day — but in a vulnerable patient, that may mean the difference between death and survival. Five children are known to have died from flu-related illnesses this season, Dr. Frieden said. Correction :  An article last Friday about federal health officials’ predictions for this year’s flu outbreak referred incorrectly to the two processes for growing flu vaccine in the United States. While the vaccine is grown in both chicken eggs and in cell broths, most of it continues to be grown in eggs; the use of cell broths is not currently the primary process. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page A 15 of the New York edition with the headline: Deadlier Flu Season Is Possible, C.D.C. Says . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Related Coverage Influenza, a Familiar Virus, Requires Attention, Too Oct. 30, 2014 Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              