   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Theater Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Review: ‘House Rules’ and All Kinds of Games Image Tiffany Villarin, left, and Tina Chilip in “House Rules.” Credit Web Begole House Rules Off Off Broadway, Drama , Play Closing Date: April 15, 2016 HERE , 145 6th Ave. 866-811-4111 More Information By  Alexis Soloski April 1, 2016 People play a lot of games in A. Rey Pamatmat’s intriguing, untidy “House Rules,” produced by Ma-Yi Theater Company . They compete at gin rummy and Monopoly, arguing over whether to leave money on the Free Parking space. They try to learn a variation of mah-jongg and battle over sungka , a traditional Filipino pastime played with cowrie shells. Of course the most complicated games are the ones that people play with one another — contests of attraction and repulsion, affection and aversion. Set in New York (although, because of the play’s haphazard exposition, it takes a while to figure that out), the play centers on two Filipino-American families who inhabit different apartments in the same building. Ernie (Jojo Gonzalez) — now in the hospital after a pair of heart attacks — is the father of Rod (James Yaegashi), a doctor, and JJ (Jeffrey Omura), a hotshot comic book artist. Vera (Mia Katigbak) is mother to Momo (Tiffany Villarin), also a doctor, and Twee (Tina Chilip), a dilettante photographer. Henry (Conrad Schott), Rod’s ex-boyfriend and colleague, rounds out the cast. Mr. Pamatmat has compelling ideas about human psychology and dramatic structure, but the completed play, under Ralph B. Peña’s somewhat busy direction, doesn’t always serve them well. Despite the talent and magnetism of the actors, the characters and their relationships can too often feel like constructs rather than fully realized men and women, though there are sometimes flashes of surprising truth, particularly in the sibling interactions. And while building the play around various games is a fine conceit, it sometimes seems too pat. It also distracts from the more interesting conversation about family and assimilation, although there’s a reward here, too, especially in a tour de force speech by the ever-engaging Ms. Katigbak , which joins the several themes. “I came here so you could be better than me,” her Vera says. “Happier than me. So you could take the rules I made up and come up with your own.” But when the game is life, in all its fullness and complexity and confusion, it’s a hard one to win. House Rules HERE 145 6th Ave. TriBeCa/SoHo 866-811-4111 here.org Category Off Off Broadway, Drama , Play Credits Written by A. Rey Pamatmat; Directed by Ralph B. Pena Cast Featuring Tina Chilip, Jojo Gonzalez, Mia Katigbak, Jeffrey Omura, Conrad Schott, Tiffany Villarin and James Yaegashi Preview March 24, 2016 Opened March 30, 2016 Closed April 15, 2016 This information was last updated on Nov. 6, 2017 “House Rules” runs through April 16 at Here, 145 Avenue of the Americas, Manhattan; 212-253-3101; ma-yitheatre.org. Running time: 1 hour 45 minutes. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page C 2 of the New York edition with the headline: Trying to Master All Kinds of Games . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              