   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Weddings Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Eric Chow, Christopher Chambers Image Credit Susannah Thornton April 8, 2018 Dr. Eric James Chow and Christopher Ryan Chambers were married April 7 at the Four Seasons Resort Hualalai in Kailua-Kona, Hawaii. Dr. Su N. Aung, a Universal Life minister and a friend of the couple, officiated. Dr. Chow (left), 33, is a chief resident at Hasbro Children’s Hospital, a teaching affiliate of Brown University in Providence, R.I., where he was trained in internal medicine and pediatrics. He graduated with two bachelor’s degrees, one in biological sciences and the other in international relations, with honors, and a master’s degree in biological sciences from Stanford. He also has both a medical degree and a master’s in public health from Eastern Virginia Medical School in Norfolk, Va. In July, he is to join the Epidemic Intelligence Service at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, which is based in Atlanta. He is a son of Julia L. Chow and Marvin Chow of La Cañada, Calif. His mother retired as a pharmacist at Queen of the Valley Hospital in West Covina, Calif. His father retired as the pharmacy manager at the City of Hope National Medical Center in Duarte, Calif. Mr. Chambers, 28, is a master diver at the New England Aquarium in Boston and oversees the care of the Giant Ocean Tank. His job there previously included rescuing and rehabilitating stranded sea turtles. He graduated from University of New Hampshire. He is the son of Joan P. Chambers and Paul B. Chambers of Saratoga Springs, N.Y. His mother retired as a school psychologist from South Glens Falls High School in Glens Falls, N.Y. His father is retired as a supervisor at St. Peter’s Hospital in Albany. The couple met on OkCupid in October 2013. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page ST 14 of the New York edition with the headline: Eric Chow,  Christopher Chambers . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              