   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Breakingviews Stocks Are Responding to Washington. That’s Bad News for Markets. By  Jeffrey Goldfarb May 18, 2017 Wall Street is finally waking up to the reality in Washington. The Standard & Poor’s 500-stock index fell 1.8 percent on Wednesday in the most notable reversal to the so-called Trump rally since last year’s election. Stockholders nevertheless remain too optimistic about any policy uplift. The promise of relaxed regulation, corporate tax cuts, and investment in America’s crumbling roads and bridges under President Trump and a Republican Congress has excited investors for most of the past six months. Clinging to that cheery outlook required overlooking a plethora of warning signals, not least the daily dysfunction in the nation’s capital and the possibility of detrimental decisions on matters such as trade. There were also the slapdash efforts at overhauling United States health care and regular leaks about investigations into potential links between the Trump campaign and Russian meddling into the election. Investors elsewhere have expressed a good deal of concern about the chances of Congress’s passing legislation that might buoy both the economy and corporate bottom lines. The United States dollar index is right back where it was in early November. The 10-year Treasury yield, after soaring to 2.6 percent from under 2 percent, has retreated to 2.2 percent. The biggest market slump since September means equity investors are getting rattled, too. For that to happen, though, it took news that Mr. Trump had asked James B. Comey, then the F.B.I. director, to end an investigation into the administration’s first national security adviser, Michael T. Flynn — along with the ensuing fallout, which has stirred mention of the word impeachment on Capitol Hill. There are, of course, other factors behind the stock market surge. For example, nearly all S & P 500 constituents have reported first-quarter results, revealing average profit growth of about 15 percent, according to Thomson Reuters data. Interest rates are low, and the employment picture is solid. Even after Wednesday’s wobble, however, bank shares have jumped by more than a fifth, and the broader market is still up by some 13 percent since Mr. Trump won at the polls. That translates into a valuation of about 25 times earnings, a multiple hard to justify without at least factoring in ancillary benefits such as a tax cut. It should mean there is a bigger D.C. discount in store. Related Coverage Movers: Brazilian Markets Down Sharply May 18, 2017 Drama in Washington Rattles Wall Street, and Stocks Dive May 17, 2017 Image Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              