   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index New York Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by U.S. List of Those Detained for Trump’s Travel Ban Is Called Incomplete Image Muneer I. Ahmad, a lawyer representing people who were detained last month as a result of a travel ban ordered by President Trump, outside the Federal District Court in Brooklyn on Friday. Credit Eduardo Munoz/Reuters By  Liz Robbins Feb. 24, 2017 A month after President Trump’s executive order barring people from seven majority-Muslim nations from entering the United States caused tumult around the country, the government’s accounting of how many travelers the ban affected remains unclear. A total of 746 people were detained and processed in a 26-hour period immediately after a federal judge in Brooklyn blocked part of Mr. Trump’s Jan. 27 order , according to a list released by the government on Thursday. The figure was nearly seven times greater than the 109 people that Mr. Trump said in a Jan. 30 message on Twitter had been “held for questioning” and Sean M. Spicer, the White House press secretary, said had been “inconvenienced.” But, according to lawyers for some of those who were detained, 746 may be an incomplete figure. At a hearing before Judge Carol B. Amon of Federal District Court in Brooklyn on Friday, those lawyers challenged the veracity of the government’s list, saying they knew of at least 10 people who had been detained who were not included in the tally. Some detainees were forced to return to the countries from which they had come, despite having valid visas. The lawyers initially asked that the government provide them with a list of names so they could help people return to the United States. Joshua Press, a Justice Department trial lawyer, said at the hearing that a vast majority of those who were held were eventually allowed to enter the country and were legal permanent residents. He said he could not provide a specific number. The Justice Department referred a request for that figure to the Customs and Border Protection agency, which declined to comment because of the continuing litigation. At the hearing, Judge Amon ordered the government to inform the plaintiffs how many of the 746 people on the government’s list had been allowed to enter the country, and to investigate the cases the plaintiffs’ lawyers said had been omitted. The list included only the given name and surname of those who were detained and did not mention nationalities. Judge Amon had not ordered that contact information be included. Image Hameed Khalid Darweesh, center, from Iraq, was held for nearly 19 hours before being granted a waiver allowing him to enter the country, at Kennedy Airport on Jan. 28. Credit Victor J. Blue for The New York Times “All we’re trying to do is put together a puzzle, to which the government has all the pieces,” said Muneer I. Ahmad, one of the lawyers for the plaintiffs. When Mr. Ahmad questioned why the people he and his colleagues cited were missing from the list, Mr. Press replied, “The government is not omniscient.” Mr. Trump’s executive order was halted on Feb. 9 by the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit in San Francisco, which upheld a ruling by a federal judge in Seattle . The Trump administration has said it plans to issue a revised order next week. Judge Ann M. Donnelly of Federal District Court in Brooklyn originally issued a stay of removal on Jan. 28 just before 9 p.m. At the time, she also ordered the government to provide a list of those people detained as a result of the executive order. The case was later assigned to Judge Amon. On Tuesday, she clarified in an order that a “snapshot” to measure how many people had been detained should include those held immediately after Judge Donnelly’s ruling, from 9:37 p.m. on Jan. 28 until 11:59 p.m. on Jan. 29. The list provided by the government did not include refugees because they generally do not arrive on weekends, said Rebecca Heller, a lawyer with the International Refugee Assistance Project. According to documents submitted to the court by the American Civil Liberties Union, some of those detained described having their phones confiscated, their requests to talk to lawyers denied and, in some cases, being coerced into signing forms that resulted in their deportation. Sara Yarjani, an Iranian citizen who is studying for a master’s degree in holistic health in California, was held for 23 hours at Los Angeles International Airport before being deported, after Judge Donnelly issued her ruling, according to court filings. Suha Amin Abdullah Abushamma, a Sudanese doctor at the Cleveland Clinic in Ohio who was born in Saudi Arabia and has a valid work visa, was detained at Kennedy Airport for 10 hours and deported, according to the filings. There is an urgent need to find those on the government’s list of people who were held, said Lee Gelernt, lead lawyer with the A.C.L.U. for detainees. He said he feared that those people might be forgotten once the Trump administration releases new travel restrictions. “We’re going to do our best to get everybody back, and then we’ll fight the new executive order,” Mr. Gelernt said. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page A 15 of the New York edition with the headline: U.S. Challenged on Tally of Travel-Ban Detainees . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Related Coverage New Trump Deportation Rules Allow Far More Expulsions Feb. 21, 2017 Image Judge Blocks Trump Order on Refugees Amid Chaos and Outcry Worldwide Jan. 28, 2017 Image Protest Grows ‘Out of Nowhere’ at Kennedy Airport After Iraqis Are Detained Jan. 28, 2017 Image Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              