   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Pro Football Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Opposition to N.F.L. Settlement Centers on Coverage for Neurological Disease By  Ken Belson Nov. 18, 2014 During his nine-year career as an N.F.L. linebacker, Jesse Solomon was a solid contributor, a 12th-round draft pick who rarely missed games despite numerous injuries. After 116 games with five teams, he retired in 1995 after a quadriceps tendon separated from his kneecap. Solomon returned to school to get teaching and coaching certificates and became a high school football coach and gym teacher. But over the years, the thousands of head hits and injuries to his neck, shoulders, hands, knees and feet took their toll. Solomon was depressed and prone to outbursts, had continual headaches and was forced to leave his job. When Solomon applied for N.F.L. disability benefits, two doctors, including a neurologist appointed by the league and the players union, said Solomon “probably is demonstrating features” of chronic traumatic encephalopathy, or C.T.E., a degenerative neurological disease that has definitively been diagnosed only in autopsies. The N.F.L. denied some of the benefits Solomon sought, a decision he is fighting. Solomon, 51, may also get nothing from the N.F.L.’s settlement with retired players, who say the league hid from them the dangers of concussions. In that deal, only the estates of players who died and were found to have C.T.E. from 2006 to this July, when the proposed settlement was approved, are eligible to receive cash awards of up to $4 million. Any former players with C.T.E. who died after July will be excluded. So will any of them who receive a C.T.E. diagnosis while living, if such a test is approved in the future. Cyril Smith of Zuckerman Spaeder, which represents Solomon in his case against the N.F.L.’s disability board and in the concussion settlement, said: “C.T.E. has its own symptoms, and to carve it out from the compensable diseases is like taking lung disease out of a settlement on smoking. If you don’t take care of this, have you settled this fairly? We think no.” The limited coverage of C.T.E. is at the core of the opposition to the settlement. Lawyers and players who have objected to the case will make that argument at a fairness hearing on Wednesday in Philadelphia, where Judge Anita B. Brody of the United States District Court for the Eastern District of Pennsylvania will hear hours of arguments for and against the proposed deal. The objectors will also contend that the settlement does not adequately cover all retirees because only those with a limited number of serious illnesses, like Parkinson’s disease, will be eligible for cash awards. They will also argue that the formula that awards more money to players who are younger and have more N.F.L. experience is unfair because a player can sustain a severe head injury in his rookie year as easily as his last season. Brody can ask the league and lawyers representing the 5,000 players who sued the N.F.L. to revise any part of the settlement. Given that several players have said they will appeal the settlement, she will be thorough. Her final approval may not come for months, and no awards will be paid until all appeals are exhausted, a process that could easily take another year. Potential revisions could include compensating players with a wider range of neurological ailments. But the N.F.L., which has promised to set aside at least $675 million for awards, may resist that amendment. Lawyers for the plaintiffs, who are pushing to complete a deal so some of the players in the worst health can be paid sooner rather than later, are also likely to resist major changes to the deal, including a wider categorization of C.T.E. Kevin Turner, a plaintiff in the concussion settlement, said: “What matters now is time, and many retired players do not have much left. I hope that the court grants approval soon so that we can finally start helping those in need.” Christopher Seeger, the co-lead counsel for the plaintiffs, has argued in court filings that the symptoms of C.T.E. are covered in the current settlement, so a retired player would be compensated if his neurological condition deteriorated. In a court filing this summer, Seeger said: “Though the objectors challenge the fact that the Settlement does not compensate ‘C.T.E.’ as a Qualifying Diagnosis in living players, they ignored that the Settlement compensates several of the most serious conditions that have been reported as outcomes and co-morbid conditions of advanced C.T.E. in the literature they cite, i.e., dementia, Alzheimer’s disease, Parkinson’s disease, and ALS.” Although Brody may ask the N.F.L. and the plaintiffs’ lawyers to change elements of the settlement, she is ultimately expected to approve the deal in part because fewer than 1 percent of retired players opted out of the settlement. By not taking part in the settlement , the players, including Tony Dorsett and Bernie Kosar, have preserved the right to continue suing the league, though it is unclear how much success they will have compared to the 5,000 former players who filed lawsuits that led to the proposed settlement. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page B 18 of the New York edition with the headline: Opposition to N.F.L. Settlement Centers on Coverage for Neurological Disease . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Related Coverage Doctors Fault Assumptions of Settlement With Retirees Sept. 30, 2014 Brain Trauma to Affect One in Three Players, N.F.L. Agrees Sept. 12, 2014 Image Altered N.F.L. Settlement Wins Judge’s Approval July 7, 2014 Show All Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              