   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Weddings Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Milly Turakhia, Kunal Rambhia Image Credit Abben and Lily Photography June 4, 2017 Dr. Milly Bipin Turakhia and Kunal Jethalal Rambhia were married in Baltimore on June 3. Ambrish Trivedi, a Hindu priest, led a ceremony that incorporated Jain traditions at the Baltimore Marriott Waterfront. The bride, 29, is a third-year resident in anesthesiology at Northwestern Memorial Hospital in Chicago. She graduated cum laude from the University of Pennsylvania and received her medical degree from the University of Maryland School of Medicine. She is the daughter of Dr. Bipin K. Turakhia and Rashmi B. Turakhia of Baltimore. The groom, 32, is a graduate student in biomedical engineering at the University of Michigan. He graduated from Yale and received a master’s degree in biotechnology from Johns Hopkins. He is a son of Alka J. Rambhia and Dr. Jethalal L. Rambhia of Pittsburgh. The couple started dating in Baltimore in 2013 after the mother of the bride gave her daughter’s number to the mother of the groom. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page ST 13 of the New York edition with the headline: Milly Turakhia,  Kunal Rambhia . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              