   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Sunday Review Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Opinion Ouch. My Personality, Reviewed. Image Credit Paul Windle By  Delia Ephron Aug. 29, 2014 THE other week I was riding crosstown in an Uber car, chatting with the very nice driver about how much I liked Uber, and the driver said, by way of being helpful, I believe, “You have a 4.5 rating. If it drops to 4.0, no driver will pick you up.” At this time I had taken only six rides in an Uber. I had no idea I was being reviewed as a passenger. A perfect score is 5.0. What could I have done to get demoted .5? In six rides? This set off serious soul-searching. Obsessing actually. On one trip I took an Uber from Manhattan to Brooklyn on a Sunday. On weekends, subways are always announcing that they have changed their minds, they are not going here or there, and if you are lucky enough to understand the loudspeaker, you can make adjustments. Unless, like me, you visit Brooklyn but don’t know Brooklyn, and have no idea where you are, ever. This is just to set the scene so you have sympathy for me. On this ride we were stopped at a corner and told we couldn’t proceed to my destination down 11th Street because a movie was shooting. Only the movie wasn’t shooting. Nothing was happening. Nevertheless two people were blocking the street. I argued with them and got nowhere. Also I asked what they were shooting (or not shooting) and they said a short. I might have made a face. Not even a regular movie. Perhaps the Uber driver was on the side of the moviemakers. Writing this now, I am on the side of the moviemakers. However, unlike me, the driver wasn’t scared of Brooklyn. He had shown me three possible 11th Streets in Brooklyn on his GPS. I was only guessing this was the one I was supposed to go to. I had no confidence about it and did not want to start strolling around and get stranded in Brooklyn. I do get short-tempered when I’m anxious. On another Uber ride, the driver had parked down the block and I had asked him to back up to the front of my building because I had a large desktop computer in a cardboard box. How polite had I been? How rude? On another trip I had barely spoken. Perhaps that was rude. Perhaps I simply am not a nice person and an Uber driver sensed it. Perhaps I had said, “Please take Fourth Avenue” in an arrogant way. Once, when I asked a speeding taxi driver to slow down, the driver said to my husband, “I have one of those at home.” We are all being rated these days. Doctors, professors, cleaners, restaurants, the purse repair store I looked up on Yelp this morning. The app Lulu lets women rate the men they date. In Boston, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center launched a pilot program that lets patients go online to read their therapists’ notes, which, in a way, is getting a rating from your shrink. I had no idea whether my therapist had ever taken notes except perhaps to jot down a name (who doesn’t have trouble remembering names?) or the details of one of my especially riveting dreams. After reading about this study, I asked many friends about their therapy experiences, and they didn’t think their therapists took notes either. Several mentioned that if the therapist did take notes, they would never want to see the notes for fear the notes would say that they were boring. “Can’t shut up about his mother.” “Still obsessing about that breakup.” “A real complainer.” Presumably another therapist (just like another Uber driver) who was thinking of taking you on, could log on to the site (even though it’s secure — we all know how meaningful that is), and find out you are B-O-R-I-N-G. Your rating, in effect, is 4.0 or lower. Once, after an appointment with a back doctor, I heard him dictating his notes about me: “patient was a pleasant middle-aged woman.” I was upset for days. “Middle-aged” was bad enough, but “pleasant?” That was one of the worst things I have ever been called. Who wants to hear what anyone thinks of you? That’s why talking behind your back was invented. I avoid reading reviews of my books for fear I’ll never write another sentence, and now I realize I am in danger of being rated whenever I leave the house. Do restaurants review diners? “Complained that the chopped salad wasn’t chopped” — I’m sure my waiter at lunch recorded that about me just last week. I have long been done with school. Nevertheless, it turns out, I am going to be getting report cards for the rest of my life. Remember your permanent record, as in “This is going on your permanent record.” The web is now your permanent record. And everything is going on it. The author, most recently, of “Sister Mother Husband Dog (etc.),” a memoir.  A version of this article appears in print on , on Page SR 8 of the New York edition with the headline: Ouch. My Personality, Reviewed. . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Related Coverage For Uber, Airbnb and Other Companies, Customer Ratings Go Both Ways Dec. 1, 2014 Image Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              