   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Book Review Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Letters to the Editor June 10, 2016 On Homecoming To the Editor: Matthew B. Crawford’s review of Sebastian Junger’s “Tribe” (May 29) includes the misleading statement that “with the help of a little medication” the traits that make a soldier a good fighter “wither.” In fact, veterans are extremely likely to be prescribed a great deal of psychiatric medication that has no effect on such traits, occasionally helps somewhat, but far more often causes a wide array of kinds of harm. Crawford distorts Junger’s argument by accepting the criticism that he “romanticizes tribal people.” Junger actually argues that the way the wider community — not the mental health system — deals with people who have been through hell has enormous impact on whether they heal from trauma. Crawford takes Junger to task for leaving out intellectual history and political philosophy, a criticism that may come from the same source as the skepticism people express when they hear about Welcome Johnny and Jane Home, a project in which nonveterans who are not therapists simply listen with 100 percent of their attention and their whole hearts to whatever a veteran wishes to say. In this highly psychiatrized world, people turn to intellectualizing, theory and science for answers, and find it hard to believe that simply connecting with a respectful member of one’s community can be helpful; but our Harvard Kennedy School study and other research prove that it nearly always is. PAULA J. CAPLAN CAMBRIDGE, MASS. The writer, an associate of the Hutchins Center at Harvard, is the author of “When Johnny and Jane Come Marching Home” and the founder and director of Welcome Johnny and Jane Home. ⬥ Psychoanalysis As Poetry To the Editor: If, as Mark O’Connell claims in reviewing Adam Phillips’s “Unforbidden Pleasures” (May 22), Phillips is “the most widely read of living psychoanalysts,” psychoanalysis will gain little credibility in the public eye if people’s reading is restricted to Phillips’s entertaining and glib essays. O’Connell acknowledges that Phillips “has always been a somewhat equivocal advocate for his profession,” but his review fails to be adequately critical of the way Phillips “plays” not only with the reader but with psychoanalysis. Psychoanalysis is a serious endeavor for most, if not all, psychoanalysts that I know, and certainly for those patients seeking the help of psychoanalysts for their emotionally based difficulties. O’Connell quotes Phillips’s statement that “I read psychoanalysis as poetry, so I don’t have to worry about whether it is true or even useful, but only whether it is haunting or moving or intriguing or amusing.” Phillips thus defines himself as more of a dilettante than a psychoanalyst who insists on evaluating each patient, each case report and all articles in the psychoanalytic literature with a deep investment in finding a credible and true explanation of the distress and suffering that has been brought to the consulting room. Asking questions as Phillips does that are often “bewilderingly rhizomatic” and leaving them enigmatically unanswered can hardly provide patients or readers with a satisfactory experience. HENRY J. FRIEDMAN CAMBRIDGE, MASS. The writer is an associate clinical professor of psychiatry, part time, at Harvard Medical School. ⬥ To the Editor: I was struck by Adam Phillips’s comment, quoted in Mark O’Connell’s review, that he reads “psychoanalysis as poetry.” It reminded me of what Norman Mailer said during his stay at Bellevue Hospital’s psychiatric service in 1960 about Freud’s collected works. I was a resident in psychiatry at the time, and Mailer was being interviewed about why he had stabbed his wife — he had been admitted to the hospital for psychiatric evaluation after that event. In the conference he said: “One day, the writings of Sigmund Freud will be viewed as the great mythic poem of the 20th century.” That observation has stayed with me for over 50 years. He was right. BENJAMIN SADOCK NEW YORK The writer is a professor of psychiatry at the New York University School of Medicine. ⬥ The Dishwasher’s Memoir To the Editor: In her review of “Sweetbitter” (May 29), Gabrielle Hamilton mentions her quest for a memoir by a “celebrity dishwasher.” It could be successfully concluded by reading the wonderful “Down and Out in Paris and London” (1933), in which George Orwell describes the horrid life of a “plongeur” in a luxury Paris restaurant. ANDREW FABER MONTE SERENO, CALIF. ⬥ The Descendant To the Editor: Nathaniel Philbrick ( By the Book , May 29) thinks that “something profoundly disturbing must have happened” to Nathaniel Hawthorne at an early age, and says, “I’d like to know what that was.” Whatever happened to Hawthorne at an early age may be far less interesting than what happened to him before he was born: the generation of Puritans that conducted the Salem witch trials, from which he was directly descended. His most famous story, “Young Goodman Brown,” is an allegory of how any man might be driven mad by a paranoid, intolerant society, like the one that culminated in the witch trials. WALTER STEPP NEW YORK The writer is a professor of English at Nassau Community College. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page 7 of the Sunday Book Review with the headline: Letters . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              