   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Politics Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Vowing Again to Tackle Opioid Crisis, Trump Faults His Predecessor Image President Trump spoke with top advisers at a meeting on the opioid crisis at his golf club in Bedminster, N.J., on Tuesday. From right, the first lady, Melania Trump; Mr. Trump; Tom Price, the secretary of health and human services; and Kellyanne Conway, the presidential counselor. Credit Al drago for The New York Times By  Peter Baker and Michael D. Shear Aug. 8, 2017 BRIDGEWATER, N.J. — President Trump promised again on Tuesday to tackle the growing epidemic of opioid abuse in the United States after blaming his predecessor for not doing more to stem the surge of drug overdoses. But he offered no specific ideas for how he would do so. Meeting with top advisers during his working vacation in New Jersey, Mr. Trump cited statistics saying that deaths stemming from opioid overdoses had skyrocketed in recent years and had become the leading cause of accidental death in the United States. He spoke generally about better health care and law enforcement action as well as guarding the southern border. “It’s a tremendous problem in our country, and I hope we get it taken care of as well as it can be taken care of — hopefully better than any other country that also has these same problems,” he told reporters at his golf club in Bedminster, N.J. “Nobody is safe from this epidemic that threatens all — young and old, rich and poor, urban and rural communities. Everybody is threatened.” He pointed to the administration of President Barack Obama. “At the end of 2016, there were 23 percent fewer federal prosecutions than in 2011, so they looked at this surge and they let it go by,” he said. “We’re not letting it go by. The average sentence for a drug offender decreased 20 percent from 2009 to 2016. During my campaign, I promised to fight this battle because, as president of the United States, my greatest responsibility is to protect the American people and to ensure their safety, especially in some parts of our country. It is horrible.” Mr. Trump did not use the occasion to declare a national opioid emergency, as his presidential commission on the epidemic recommended. The bipartisan panel, led by Gov. Chris Christie, Republican of New Jersey, concluded that about 142 Americans died every day from opioid use. The panel also called the emergency declaration its “ first and most urgent recommendation ,” one that could force more attention on the problem from Congress and from the public. White House officials said the president and his team were still reviewing the commission’s interim report. Tom Price, the secretary of health and human services, said, “We will treat it as an emergency,” but noted that such declarations were typically reserved for specific, geographically limited outbreaks of infectious diseases. “We believe that, at this point, that the resources that we need or the focus that we need to bring to bear to the opioid crisis at this point can be addressed without the declaration of an emergency, although all things are on the table for the president,” he told reporters. But Democrats did not wait for Mr. Trump’s event in New Jersey to criticize him for failing to live up to his own promises to take action to stop the epidemic, accusing him of nothing more than “empty rhetoric.” “Trump promised he’d come to the aid of communities ravaged by the opioid epidemic, but so far he’s done nothing for them,” Daniel Wessel, a spokesman for the Democratic National Committee, said in a statement. “In fact, Trump’s budget proposal and the Medicaid cuts he supported as part of the Republican health care repeal would both make this crisis even worse.” Meeting with the president at the Trump National Golf Club were Mr. Price, as well as a number of presidential aides, including John F. Kelly, the chief of staff; Jared Kushner, Mr. Trump’s son-in-law and senior adviser; Kellyanne Conway, the presidential counselor; Robert Porter, the White House staff secretary; and Richard Baum, the acting director of the Office of National Drug Control Policy. Melania Trump, the first lady, also attended. Not present was Chuck Rosenberg, the acting director of the Drug Enforcement Administration, or anyone else from his agency, which has taken the lead in fighting the spread of opioids. Mr. Rosenberg crossed the White House late last month when he sent an agencywide email saying that the president had improperly “condoned police misconduct” by telling an audience of law enforcement officers not to “be too nice” to criminal suspects. He told his agents to show “respect and compassion” to those they encountered, including victims and defendants. Aides have said Mr. Trump was joking, but they offered no explanation for Mr. Rosenberg’s absence from the opioid meeting, instead referring questions to the agency. Mr. Rosenberg is a close ally of James B. Comey, whom Mr. Trump fired as F.B.I. director in May, and previously worked for Robert S. Mueller III, the special counsel investigating ties between Mr. Trump’s team and Russia. A spokeswoman for the D.E.A. said none of its employees attended the meeting. “The D.E.A. stands in support of the administration’s efforts to combat the opioid crisis,” said the spokeswoman, Mary Brandenberg, declining to comment further. Politicians, law enforcement and health care officials across the country are struggling to confront the surging crisis of addiction and death associated with opioids — painkillers like Vicodin, Percocet and OxyContin as well as synthetic drugs imported from China like fentanyl. An emergency declaration could help free federal money to combat the epidemic and force agencies to do more to confront it, said Dr. Andrew Kolodny, co-director of opioid policy research at the Heller School for Social Policy and Management at Brandeis University. He said that more than 300,000 Americans had died from opioid overdoses since 1999 and that the problem was getting worse. Other public health experts said such a declaration was mostly symbolic. “In terms of saving lives, states are already all-in on this issue,” said Michael Fraser, executive director of the Association of State and Territorial Health Officers, which represents public health agencies and health professionals in the United States and its territories. The urgency about opioids has been on Mr. Trump’s radar since the earliest days of his presidency, as a transcript of a Jan. 27 call with President Enrique Peña Nieto of Mexico that was published last week showed. During the call, according to the transcript published by The Washington Post, Mr. Trump referred to New Hampshire as “a drug-infested den.” New Hampshire has struggled with widespread opioid abuse among its residents. But many of the state’s politicians and residents took issue with Mr. Trump’s comments, including the Republican governor, Chris Sununu, who flatly said, “The president is wrong.” “It’s disappointing his mischaracterization of this epidemic ignores the great things this state has to offer,” Mr. Sununu said. Follow Peter Baker and Michael Shear on Twitter @peterbakernyt and @shearm. Peter Baker reported from Bridgewater, and Michael D. Shear from Washington. Abby Goodnough and Michael S. Schmidt contributed reporting from Washington.  A version of this article appears in print on , on Page A 13 of the New York edition with the headline: Vowing Again to Attack Opioids, Trump Faults Obama . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              