   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index New York Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by A Front Line Against Ebola Runs Through Newark’s Terminal B Image An Ebola outbreak in Africa has increased the workload for Erica J. Sison, the head quarantine officer at Newark Liberty Airport. Credit Todd Heisler/The New York Times By  Anemona Hartocollis Aug. 8, 2014 Erica J. Sison has dealt with sick and dead dogs and cats, 40 dead lab rats in bags, trophy animals, cooked monkey meat on sticks, human skulls from Indonesia and a live Asian bat that flew out of an airplane cargo hold. Now she is poised for Ebola , and has seen three false alarms in the last two weeks. Ms. Sison, the quarantine officer in charge at Newark Liberty International Airport, is on the front lines of a complex system developed to protect United States borders from a “Contagion”-like invasion of rare foreign diseases. It is, she says, a bit anxiety provoking. “I’ve learned pretty quick that I can never predict what someone is going to tell me when that phone rings,” she said on Friday. “These last two weeks we’ve been on adrenaline.” The job is a largely unseen and unknown part of the border security system at 18 airports (including Kennedy International Airport) and two border crossings. Ms. Sison, an officer in the Public Health Service Commissioned Corps, works for the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. She operates from an office at Newark’s Terminal B, the international arrivals terminal, in a secure area not far from where arriving passengers have to show their passports and are treated to C.D.C.-sponsored video monitors showing information about the Ebola outbreak in West Africa that has killed nearly 1,000 people. In some ways, she is an Ellis Island of the airways, charged with ensuring that immigrants are fit to enter the country. But while some people who were ill were held at Ellis Island, Ms. Sison said, she does not hold people. If they need treatment, they may be quarantined, but only until they can be sent by ambulance to a hospital. There is a one-bed isolation room in her office, but it is more like the school nurse’s office than a space capsule. How Many Ebola Patients Have Been Treated Outside of Africa? Questions and answers on the scale of the outbreak and the science of the Ebola virus. July 31, 2014 Ms. Sison, 36, who has degrees in chemistry and public health and is completing her doctorate in epidemiology at Rutgers, took the post five years ago. She found out about it while working at the Newark city health department, on a measles case with the airport quarantine office. She trains border protection officers on the disease du jour, so they know when to call her. In the case of Ebola, she has told them that the transmission is not airborne but that they should be alert for symptoms like fever, sweating and vomiting in travelers from West African countries like Sierra Leone, Liberia, Guinea and Nigeria. Less than 0.5 percent of the 243,000 international travelers to United States airports each day originate from those countries, including an average of 679 from Nigeria and 145 from the other three countries, according to the C.D.C. The post can be busy even when there is not a major disease scare. Quarantine officers, who are often not physicians, make 2,000 health consultations a year with C.D.C. physicians about sick travelers, Kristen Nordlund, a spokeswoman for the agency, said. The last big scare was MERS , or Middle Eastern Respiratory Syndrome, first reported in Saudi Arabia in 2012. The first confirmed cases in the United States were in May of this year, in travelers from Saudi Arabia. At the moment, Ms. Sison said, the C.D.C.’s airport video terminals are flipping every few seconds between the latest exotic diseases: Ebola, MERS, measles and Chikungunya , a virus transmitted by mosquitoes that has been found in countries in Africa, Asia, Europe and the Indian and Pacific Oceans, as well as, for the first time last year, on Caribbean islands. Usually, sick travelers are glad to see her because they want help, Ms. Sison said. The more combative passengers are the ones who are trying to bring in something that is precious to them but could carry disease, like monkey meat. Passengers from West African countries are not specifically targeted for Ebola checks, C.D.C. officials said. “We’re not taking these passengers and doing anything differently,” Ms. Nordlund said. Still, the border agents are on high alert. This week and last week, Ms. Sison was called to her first suspected Ebola cases, two missionaries and a nonprofit worker who had been living in Liberia. They were not symptomatic, but the border agents “just wanted us to talk to them,” perhaps because of where the passengers had been, Ms. Sison said. The travelers were hyperaware of the risks. “They had to explain to people that they didn’t shake hands or hug,” she said. As it turned out, they were not sick; they were sent on their way, and the all clear was sounded, for now. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page A 17 of the New York edition with the headline: An Ebola Front Line at Newark’s Terminal B . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Related Coverage U.N. Agency Calls Ebola Outbreak an International Health Emergency Aug. 8, 2014 Image ‘Don’t Touch the Walls’: Ebola Fears Infect an African Hospital Aug. 7, 2014 Image Ebola Outbreak Hits Home for New York’s West African Immigrants Aug. 5, 2014 Image Show All Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              