   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Weddings Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Christie Cunningham and Jonathan McNeill March 23, 2014 Image Credit Jade + Matthew Christie Lauren Cunningham and Jonathan David McNeill were married Friday at their home in Philadelphia in a ceremony held under Pennsylvania’s self-uniting marriage statute. On March 10, the Rev. Allen Cudahy, a Lutheran minister, led a ceremony at the Pangas Beach Club in Playa Tamarindo, Costa Rica. The bride, 27, and the groom, 29, are graduate students at the University of Pennsylvania, where the bride is studying for an M.B.A. and the groom for a medical degree. They met at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, where each graduated with highest distinction. In July, Mrs. McNeill is to join the Philadelphia office of McKinsey & Company, the management consulting firm. She is the daughter of Robin P. Cunningham and Michael A. Cunningham, who live and work in Wilmington, N.C. The bride’s father is a managing partner in the Clearpath Consulting Group, a human resources and insurance consulting firm. Her mother is a learning coordinator at the University of North Carolina School of Nursing. Next month, Mr. McNeill is to become a health care consultant in the New York office of the Boston Consulting Group. He is a son of Dr. Diana B. McNeill and David C. McNeill, who live and work in Durham, N.C. The groom’s mother, an endocrinologist, is a professor of medicine at Duke University School of Medicine, where she is also the director of the Academy for Health Professions Education and Academic Development. His father is a project manager in corporate finance with IBM. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page ST 19 of the New York edition with the headline: Christie Cunningham, Jonathan McNeill . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              