   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Weddings Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Regina DePietro, Benjamin Casterline May 28, 2017 Dr. Regina Heyl DePietro and Benjamin Warren Casterline are to be married May 28. The Rev. Dr. Eric K. Hinds, an Episcopal priest, is to perform the ceremony at the Basilica Hudson, an events space in Hudson, N.Y. The couple met at the University of Chicago, from which both graduated. Dr. DePietro, 28, received a medical degree from Stony Brook University on May 18 and is to begin the internship year of a family medicine residency in June at MacNeal Hospital in Berwyn, Ill. She is the daughter of Dorothy Heyl and Thomas M. DePietro of Hudson. Her father was the editor of “Conversations With Don DeLillo” (University of Mississippi Press, 2005) and “Conversations With Kingsley Amis” (University of Mississippi Press, 2009), and is the chairman of the planning board in Hudson. The bride’s mother was, until last month, of counsel at Milbank, Tweed, Hadley & McCloy, the New York law firm, and is the general counsel and chief compliance officer at Prima Capital Advisors, an investment advisory firm in Scarsdale, N.Y. Mr. Casterline, 29, is studying for both a medical degree and a doctoral degree, in immunology, at the University of Chicago. He is studying the possibility that early exposure in life to a type of gut bacterium, which is implicated in inflammatory bowel disease and colorectal cancer, may predispose people to those diseases. He is the son of Lauralee V. Thompson and John B. Casterline of Columbus, Ohio. His mother retired as a senior lecturer in sociology at Ohio State University and is a volunteer curatorial assistant at the C. A. Triplehorn Insect Collection in the university’s Museum of Biological Diversity. His father, also a sociologist, is the director of the Institute for Population Research at Ohio State. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page ST 17 of the New York edition with the headline: Regina DePietro,  Benjamin Casterline . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              