   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Europe Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Perm Journal Moscow Crushes an Uprising, This Time an Artistic One Image People near the Boris Matrosov artwork “Happiness Is Just Around the Corner,” on the banks of the Kama River in the center of Perm. Credit James Hill for The New York Times By  Ivan Nechepurenko Aug. 24, 2016 PERM, Russia — Perm, a provincial Russian city on the western edge of Siberia, is defined these days not by what it is, but by what it was supposed to be by now and isn’t. By now it should have had a new sleek opera theater, designed by the British architect David Chipperfield, a shining contemporary art museum in a refurbished landmark building and a gallery of celebrated local wooden statues — an imposing white cube standing over the wide expanse of the Kama River. The central esplanade — proudly described by locals as longer than the National Mall in Washington — should have been full of avid visitors from around Russia and beyond, taking in theater on pop-up stages and progressive street art. But none of this has happened. Image Boris L. Milgram, who was fired as minister of culture in Perm, Russia. “We realized that we had this unique chance to make Perm into a place where people would want to live,” he said, “but there is always this fear in Russia that creative freedom makes people too difficult to control.” Credit James Hill for The New York Times In 2008, Perm became a laboratory for an audacious social and cultural experiment. Oleg A. Chirkunov, the regional governor at the time, decided to use art projects to try to propel the modernization of provincial life. An ambitious and forward-looking politician, Mr. Chirkunov invited Marat A. Guelman, Russia’s pre-eminent arts impresario and an occasional spin doctor for politicians, to direct the project. “We destroyed this stereotype that there cannot be anything interesting in Russia beyond Moscow and St. Petersburg,” said Mr. Guelman, who has since left Russia for Montenegro. “Locals realized that their status had changed and began to demand more. When you have a contemporary art museum in town, people want clean roads, too.” By now, according to the plan laid out by Mr. Guelman, the city should have been rivaling Moscow and St. Petersburg, for centuries the only artistic centers of gravity in Russia. It is not. Its brief renaissance ended in 2012, and since then Perm has lapsed into its former status as an average Russian industrial city: an utterly unglamorous mixture of charming but mostly lackluster tsarist buildings in the center and piles of gray concrete in the suburbs. Image An exhibition at the Memorial Complex of Political Repressions “Perm-36,” near Perm. Credit James Hill for The New York Times Before Perm made headlines as a cultural powerhouse, it had an identity as the gateway to the gulag, a hub for political prisoners shuttled through the city on their way to camps in Siberia. In the 1950s, when that traffic slowed, Perm began to produce ballistic missiles, making it off-limits to foreigners. Mr. Guelman had a grandiose vision of transforming Perm to demonstrate to Russia’s other lethargic provincial cities how they could become vibrant cultural capitals in their own right. He hoped that the project would give them a measure of independence in a country where most regions depend on Moscow and are therefore easily controlled by the Kremlin. Mr. Guelman opened PERMM , a contemporary art museum, the only one of its kind in Russia outside Moscow, and created a number of festivals that filled Perm with visitors from around the country and beyond. The local government invited Teodor I. Currentzis , a Russian conductor of Greek origin, to lead the local opera . Today, he is one of the few artists still hanging on in Perm. Image A worker at the Memorial Complex of Political Repressions “Perm-36.” The museum complex on the state-owned site was founded by local historians who recently lost control of it by what they claimed was a legal assault against them. Credit James Hill for The New York Times “I had offers from many leading orchestras in Europe, but I chose to stay in Perm,” said Mr. Currentzis, 44, who favors tight black jeans and leather biker jackets. “The reason is that I believe in this utopian idea of promoting a ‘Plan B’ for the Russian culture.” But that vision was anathema to the one man whose opinion counts above all others in Russia, President Vladimir V. Putin. In 2012, shortly before Mr. Putin returned to the presidency after serving as prime minister, Moscow replaced Mr. Chirkunov with a bureaucrat, Viktor F. Basargin. Mr. Basargin quickly set about undoing most of what Mr. Guelman had accomplished. He appointed Igor A. Gladnev local culture minister, with the express order of returning Perm to its drab former self. In an interview, Mr. Gladnev said he was proud of his work and called elitist Western culture “a pest” that had infected his hometown. Image Audience members leaving the Perm Tchaikovsky Opera and Ballet Theater after a performance of baroque music. Credit James Hill for The New York Times “This pest was blossoming violently on the soil of Perm region,” said Mr. Gladnev, 55, a former actor. “No outstanding exhibits were presented and no distinguished performers emerged over this period. Nothing deep and bright was created.” Mr. Gladnev was so impatient for his scathing remarks to appear in print that he even published the entire interview with The New York Times on his website before this article appeared. Local cultural leaders went into shock. Four red Lego-like figures that had been erected on Perm’s main square were among the first things to go. The “Red Men,” as the work was called, set off protest among local conservatives. Regional lawmakers refused to pass next year’s budget unless the figures were removed. A small team of workers removed the figures in the dark of night. Eight months later a shining plaque of the Order of Lenin was installed in the same spot. “This swap was very symbolic, better than what an artist could imagine,” said Nailya B. Allakhverdiyeva, who curated the red people project and selected their initial habitat. “The symbol of progress was exchanged for the symbol of past.” Last month, Mr. Gladnev fired Boris L. Milgram, the director of the local theater and his predecessor as culture minister, and filled the post with an employee from the legal department. “We were dreamers,” Mr. Milgram said, sitting in an office overflowing with awards and gifts, including a Golden Mask, Russia’s highest theater award. “We realized that we had this unique chance to make Perm into a place where people would want to live, but there is always this fear in Russia that creative freedom makes people too difficult to control.” The public outrage at Mr. Milgram’s dismissal was so great that Mr. Basargin, the governor, felt compelled to reinstate him. Image Tatyana Kursina and Viktor Shmyrov, the founders of the museum at what is now known as the Memorial Complex of Political Repressions “Perm-36,” near Perm. Credit James Hill for The New York Times Today, Mr. Milgram and Mr. Currentzis refuse to abandon Perm completely, though Mr. Currentzis takes time away to conduct Mozart in Salzburg, Austria, and Wagner in Germany. “We didn’t come here for good architecture. The architecture is better in Paris than in Perm,” Mr. Currentzis said. “Why do young people leave provincial towns? We wanted to change that and we did.” Along with Mr. Milgram, Mr. Currentzis is one of the few magnets still luring visitors to Perm, among them Mr. Chirkunov, the former governor. “We had our mistakes, but I am proud of what we did,” said Mr. Chirkunov, who lives in France. He visits Perm now and then, especially to go to the opera, which he thinks is superior to the Opéra Bastille in Paris. “These were the best years of my life.” A version of this article appears in print on , on Page A 5 of the New York edition with the headline: Moscow Crushes an Uprising, This Time an Artistic One . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Related Coverage A Bilbao on Siberia’s Edge? July 22, 2011 Image Modern Dance and Art Bring a Burst of Color to a Gray City May 27, 2009 Pushing Art, Maybe a Bit Too Far Nov. 23, 2010 Image Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              