   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Science Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Trilobites How Ants Figured Out Farming Millions of Years Before Humans Image A fungus-farming ant in Guyana. Credit Piotr Naskrecki/Minden Pictures By  Joanna Klein April 11, 2017 We humans think we’re pretty smart because we invented farming. But we didn’t. In a rain forest in South America millions of years ago, itty-bitty ants with brains no bigger than a pinpoint had already figured it out. They started farming fungus for food — probably not too long after the Chicxulub meteor impact caused the mass extinction event that obliterated up to three-quarters of the rest of Earth’s plants and animals. Today some 250 species of ants in tropical forests, deserts and grasslands throughout the Americas build fungi gardens in climate-controlled chambers underground. They weed them. They water them. Some even use antibiotics or chemicals to keep harmful bacteria away from their crop. Now scientists have traced the evolutionary history of how these ants became such sophisticated fungus farmers over millions of years in a study published Tuesday in the journal Proceedings of the Royal Society B. Image Ted Schultz, an entomologist at the Smithsonian National Museum of Natural History, with a lab nest of lower fungus-growing ants. Credit James DiLoreto/Smithsonian “If you had X-ray vision and you could look out in a wet, new-world tropical forest, you’d see the entire underground just peppered with garden chambers,” said Ted Schultz , an entomologist at the Smithsonian National Museum of Natural History and lead author of the study. By comparing the genomes of 78 species of fungus farmers, including leaf-cutter ants, with 41 non-fungus farming species, Dr. Schultz and his colleagues revealed curious patterns. They found that fungus-farming ants probably all came from the same ancestor in the rain forests of South America some 60 million years ago. But 30 million years later, two kinds of ant-farming societies diverged. One contained higher, more complex agriculturalists, which probably transported their fungus with them to dry or seasonably dry climates like deserts or savannas. There, they cared for it in their underground gardens, co-evolving until the fungus became totally dependent on its farmer. The second society was made up of lower, less complex agriculturalists, based primarily in tropical forests, and they grew fungus capable of escaping its garden and living independently. Image The underground garden chamber of a primitive, lower fungus-farming ant colony near Brasília, Brazil. Dr. Schultz speculated that with enough time, the dry climate created ideal conditions for the more complex ant farmers to domesticate the fungus, controlling temperature by digging deeper chambers, or maintaining humidity by bringing in water from fruits, plants or morning dew. “They’re already kind of putting their fungal crops in greenhouses,” he said, “but if you’re in a dry habitat, even if your fungal crop could escape, there’s nowhere to go.” Dr. Schultz thinks we can take a lesson from these ant-brained farming methods. An ant’s fungus garden is primarily a monoculture, but the ants can sustain it for about 15 or 20 years. The ants weed out fungi that try to eat what they’ve grown, or chemicals produced by the cultivated fungus kill it. “These ants have been growing fungi for 55, 60 million years, and this crop disease has been around pretty much since the beginning, and it’s all sort of sustainable,” Dr. Schultz said. “If that were a human in that position, the vegetation for a mile around would be denuded.”  Like the Science Times page on Facebook. | Sign up for the Science Times newsletter. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page D 2 of the New York edition with the headline: Ant Farms: Deep Underground, Insects Plan A Fungus Harvest . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Related Coverage A Farmer Ant’s Unique Fungal Crop March 30, 2015 Image How the First Farmers Changed History Oct. 17, 2016 Image Gene-Modified Ants Shed Light on How Societies Are Organized Jan. 23, 2017 Image Show All Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              