   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Weddings Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Rebecca Weiler, Bret Sohn Image Credit Mary Craven April 15, 2018 Rebecca Lynne Weiler and Dr. Bret Kenneth Sohn were married April 14 at Disney’s Wedding Pavilion, an events space in Orlando, Fla. Rabbi Karen Allen officiated. The bride, 34, is a mental health and career counselor in private practice in New York and Nashville. She primarily works with patients dealing with career changes, career transitions and depression. She is also a singer, and has performed at Carnegie Hall as part of the choir Essential Voices USA. She graduated from State University of New York at Oneonta and received a master’s degree in counseling from Fordham. The bride is a daughter of Robert K. Weiler of Syracuse and the late Andrea B. Weiler. The bride’s father is a law partner and bankruptcy attorney for the Syracuse law firm Bousquet Holstein. Her late mother was a social worker in Syracuse. The groom, 36, is a physician and a fellow in the department of rheumatology at Vanderbilt. He graduated cum laude from St. George’s University School of Medicine in St. George’s, Grenada, and received a master’s degree in immunology from New York Medical College. Dr. Sohn is a son of Nancy R. Sohn and Stephen E. Sohn of Scarsdale, N.Y. His parents both work in Scarsdale. His mother is the president and chief executive officer of a market research company bearing her name. His father is the owner of a martial arts and fitness center bearing his name. The couple met in 2015 at a wine bar in Gotham West Market in New York. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page ST 14 of the New York edition with the headline: Rebecca Weiler,  Bret Sohn . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              