   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Weddings Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Katherine Richard, Christian Kanady Image Dec. 3, 2017 Katherine Taaffe Richard, a daughter of Mary Holloway Richard and Dr. James M. Richard of Oklahoma City, was married Dec. 2 to Michael Christian Kanady, a son of Randi Ann Kanady and Michael B. Kanady, also of Oklahoma City. The Rev. Charles Blizzard, an Episcopal priest, performed the ceremony at St. Edward the Confessor Chapel at Casady School, a preparatory school, also in Oklahoma City. Mrs. Kanady, 35, is the founder and the chief executive of the Warwick Energy Group, an energy investment private equity firm based in Oklahoma City. She graduated cum laude from Harvard. The bride’s parents also work in Oklahoma City. Her father is a pediatric ophthalmologist in private practice, and her mother is a health care lawyer. Mr. Kanady, 38, who is known as Christian, is the founder and chief executive of Echo Energy, an oil and gas royalty acquisition company and drilling operator in Oklahoma City. He graduated from the University of Oklahoma. The groom’s parents, both retired, worked in Oklahoma City. His mother was a health care administrator. His father owned a pharmacy. The couple met as students at Casady School. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page ST 18 of the New York edition with the headline: Katherine Richard,  Michael Kanady . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              