   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Movies Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Summer Movie Release Schedule 2017 Image Johnny Depp in “Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Man Tell No Tales.” Credit Disney By  Ben Kenigsberg May 5, 2017 All dates are subject to change. May May 10 THE DROWNING An independent filmmaker with an experimental streak, Bette Gordon (whose credits include “Variety,” the 1983 riff on “Vertigo”) directs this thriller centered on a forensic psychologist (Josh Charles). In the Pat Barker novel “Border Crossing,” on which it’s based, he rescues a young man from suicide, then learns that years earlier he had testified against him as an expert witness. Julia Stiles also stars. MANIFESTO Those who can’t get enough of Cate Blanchett will find her here playing 13 roles. The words the characters recite are drawn from more than 50 manifestoes — most of them artistic declarations from the 20th century. The film was shown in installation form at the Park Avenue Armory in December and January before heading to Sundance. May 12 FOLK HERO & FUNNY GUY A flailing comedian (Alex Karpovsky) tries to regain his mojo by going on tour with an old friend, a folk-rock musician (Wyatt Russell). Meredith Hagner, Michael Ian Black and Melanie Lynskey also star. GET ME ROGER STONE Never camera shy, the political operative Roger Stone, often credited as a pioneer in negative campaigning, recounts the story of his career and, in particular, his involvement in grooming Donald Trump as a candidate. Mr. Trump’s former campaign chief Paul Manafort also appears in this documentary, which will be released in theaters and on Netflix simultaneously. HOUNDS OF LOVE It’s not a tribute to the Kate Bush album of the same title, but an Australian thriller about a young woman (Ashleigh Cummings) who’s abducted by a serial-killer couple (Emma Booth and Stephen Curry). The news media in Perth have noted similarities between the plot and a real-life case. Image Djimon Hounsou, left, and Charlie Hunnam, foreground, in “King Arthur: Legend of the Sword.” Credit Daniel Smith/Warner Bros. KING ARTHUR: LEGEND OF THE SWORD After two revisionist takes on Sherlock Holmes, the director Guy Ritchie aims to show off the hipper side of King Arthur, a character whose last major reboot was in a 2004 Antoine Fuqua film. An irreverent Charlie Hunnam plays the title role; Jude Law is the pretender to Arthur’s rightful throne. THE LAST SHAMAN A suicidal man ventures into the Amazon in search of a shaman he thinks will heal him. He also tries the hallucinogenic brew ayahuasca. Documentary filmmakers follow along. Image Demián Bichir and Eva Longoria in “Lowriders.” Credit Justin Lubin/Universal Pictures LOWRIDERS Gabriel Chavarria plays a Mexican-American street artist with big dreams in East Los Angeles; his creative aspirations put him at odds with his tough-love father (Demián Bichir), who runs a garage catering to the neighborhood’s lowrider scene . Theo Rossi plays his ex-convict brother; Eva Longoria and Melissa Benoist (“Supergirl”) also star. MERI PYAARI BINDU Has Bollywood ever made a musical about mixtape nostalgia? A writer’s-blocked author (Ayushmann Khurrana) finds his muse after listening to an old cassette. PARIS CAN WAIT Does anyone in the Coppola family not make films? Eleanor Coppola (the wife of Francis Ford Coppola) has directed before — she was one of the filmmakers behind the documentary “ Hearts of Darkness: A Filmmaker’s Apocalypse ,” which went behind the scenes of “Apocalypse Now.” But this is her first fiction feature, which she also wrote. Diane Lane, playing the wife of a Hollywood producer (Alec Baldwin), finds herself rejuvenated by a car trip across France. Image Amy Schumer, left, and Goldie Hawn in “Snatched.” Credit Justina Mintz/20th Century Fox SNATCHED Pairing Goldie Hawn and Amy Schumer in the same comedy is one of those brilliant comic ideas that just needed to happen. They play a bickering mother and daughter who bond after being kidnapped on a tropical vacation. The screenwriter Katie Dippold (“The Heat”) supplied the banter; Jonathan Levine (“50/50”) directs. STEFAN ZWEIG: FAREWELL TO EUROPE The work of the Austrian writer Stefan Zweig has inspired many movies (including “Letter From an Unknown Woman” and “The Grand Budapest Hotel”). So maybe it was inevitable that he would get a biopic of his own. This film, by Maria Schrader, focuses on the years 1936 to 1942, when Zweig (Josef Hader) lived in exile overseas. TRACKTOWN In case you thought world-class athletes were insufficiently talented, Alexi Pappas, an American-born runner who represented Greece at the 2016 Olympics, wrote and stars in this story of a long-distance runner who falls for a boy at the bakery while she is sidelined with an injury. She also directs, with Jeremy Teicher. URBAN HYMN Taking the riots that swept Britain in 2011 as a topical peg, this drama focuses on a troubled teenager (Letitia Wright) who is coaxed out of her shell by a social worker (Shirley Henderson) at her group home and encouraged to fulfill her talent for singing. Michael Caton-Jones (“Rob Roy”) directs. THE WALL In Iraq, two American soldiers (Aaron Taylor-Johnson and John Cena) are trapped by an Iraqi sniper. Behind a crumbling wall, Mr. Taylor-Johnson maintains radio contact with the man who almost — almost — has him in his sights. We’ll soon find out whether Doug Liman, the director of “The Bourne Identity” and “Edge of Tomorrow,” is capable of drawing out suspense on a tighter scale. Image Noa Koler in “The Wedding Plan.” Credit Roadside Attractions THE WEDDING PLAN The ultra-Orthodox filmmaker Rama Burshtein made one of the more intriguing recent splashes on the festival circuit with “Fill the Void” (2013), a Jewish take on Jane Austen themes. In “The Wedding Plan,” called “Through the Wall” at festivals, a 32-year-old (Noa Koler) pre-emptively plans a wedding, giving herself a three-week deadline to find a husband. WHISKY GALORE! In this remake of Alexander Mackendrick’s 1949 Ealing Studios comedy, the wartime residents of a Scottish island that has run out of whisky face off with the commander (Eddie Izzard) of a ship that’s run aground, which happens to be carrying 50,000 cases of the stuff. May 19 Image From left, Jill, Vera and Thomas Sung in “Abacus: Small Enough to Jail.” Credit Sean Lyness/PBS ABACUS: SMALL ENOUGH TO JAIL Steve James (“Hoop Dreams”) follows the legal travails of Abacus Federal Savings Bank, a pillar of the immigrant community in Chinatown, that was charged in 2012 with mortgage fraud. (It was acquitted in 2015.) Although there’s a newsworthy hook — the film suggests that Abacus was a scapegoat for larger banks after the financial crisis — the movie is primarily an affectionate look at the Sung family, which runs the bank, and its resolve in the face of adversity. AFTERIMAGE The Polish director Andrzej Wajda , who died at 90 in October, grappled one last time with his country’s history in his final film, a portrait of the painter Wladyslaw Strzeminski (Boguslaw Linda), who pushed back against the postwar Communist regime’s mandates for art and sacrificed his career as a result. ALIEN: COVENANT Face huggers! Bloodthirsty anamorphic-melon-headed aliens! Katherine Waterston in a very strange hairdo! Ridley Scott again revisits the franchise that may be his most lasting legacy, with an entry set sometime after the events in “Prometheus” (2012) but before those in “Alien” (1979). Along with Ms. Waterston, Billy Crudup, Amy Seimetz, Demián Bichir, Danny McBride and Carmen Ejogo are among the space colonists in for a rude surprise, with Michael Fassbender returning from “Prometheus” as an android (or two). THE COMMUNE You wouldn’t know it from the high-society recriminations in his Dogma 95 landmark, “The Celebration,” but the Danish director Thomas Vinterberg was raised in a commune . Although this 1970s-set film isn’t a memoir, it draws on that experience. Trine Dyrholm and Ulrich Thomsen play a couple who decide to start their own group-living arrangement. DEVIL’S DOMAIN You’ve seen movies about Faustian bargains, but have you seen one about a girl (Madi Vodane) who makes a pact with the Devil (Linda Bella) to get revenge on her high school cyberbullies? DIARY OF A WIMPY KID: THE LONG HAUL The wimpy kid grew up, so Hollywood found a new one. In the fourth film based on Jeff Kinney’s popular books, Greg (now Jason Ian Drucker) goes on a family road trip. Alicia Silverstone and Tom Everett Scott, also on their first outings in the Wimpy-verse, play his parents. EVERYTHING, EVERYTHING Housebound for life because of a compromised immune system, an 18-year-old (Amandla Stenberg) falls for the boy (Nick Robinson) who moves in next door in this adaptation of Nicola Yoon’s best-selling young-adult novel . FIGHT FOR SPACE Looking back over the history of the United States space program, this documentary advocates for its vigorous future. The interviewees include the Apollo 13 commander, Jim Lovell, and the astrophysicist Neil deGrasse Tyson , who seems to violate the laws of science by being everywhere at all times. HELL ON EARTH: THE FALL OF SYRIA AND THE RISE OF ISIS Directing jointly, the author and filmmaker Sebastian Junger and his frequent producing collaborator Nick Quested (“Restrepo”) examine the origins of the Islamic State, with a particular emphasis on the civil war in Syria — an exceedingly timely topic. ICAROS: A VISION Leonor Caraballo, who directed this movie with Matteo Norzi but died from cancer before it was complete, is said to have based it on her own experiences. It follows an American (Ana Cecilia Stieglitz) in the Peruvian Amazon as she seeks shamanic healing for an illness. LEGION OF BROTHERS Members of two United States Special Forces teams that were among the earliest American troops sent into Afghanistan in 2001 recount their missions in this documentary. PAINT IT BLACK Alia Shawkat plays a Los Angeles woman who, after her boyfriend’s death, becomes enmeshed in a toxic, codependent relationship with the man’s mother (Janet McTeer). The actress Amber Tamblyn makes her directing debut, working from the novel by Janet Fitch (“White Oleander”). THE SURVIVALIST A standout at the 2015 Tribeca Film Festival, Stephen Fingleton’s debut feature is a terse portrait of life in a postapocalyptic wood. Martin McCann is the title character, who lives alone and fends off all comers until two women (Mia Goth and Olwen Fouéré) turn up at his doorstep. WAKEFIELD For her second directorial feature, the veteran screenwriter Robin Swicord (“Little Women”) adapts an E. L. Doctorow story that appeared in The New Yorker. Bryan Cranston stars as a man who, on impulse, leaves his family and moves into the attic of his garage. Jennifer Garner plays his wife. THE WOMAN WHO LEFT Ten years ago, the Filipino director Lav Diaz was a forbidding figure, even among extreme cinephiles. At film festivals they would ask one another in hushed tones whether they really planned to see his nine-hour “Death in the Land of Encantos.” Lately, Mr. Diaz seems to have widened his appeal, earning acclaim for his Dostoyevsky-inspired “Norte, the End of History” and for this new drama, which won the Golden Lion at the Venice Film Festival in 2016. At nearly four hours, it is also one of Mr. Diaz’s shortest films. May 24 Image The ballerina Wendy Whelan in “Restless Creature: Wendy Whelan.” Credit Got The Shot Films RESTLESS CREATURE: WENDY WHELAN Heavy on ballet performances, this documentary focuses on Ms. Whelan, a principal dancer at the New York City Ballet until 2014. It catches her at a difficult moment, when she has surgery for an injury. May 25 BAYWATCH Directed by Seth Gordon (“Horrible Bosses”), the latest TV property resurrection follows in the tradition of “21 Jump Street,” turning the 1989-2001 drama that was already close to camp into an outright comedy. Dwayne Johnson, Zac Efron, Alexandra Daddario and Priyanka Chopra have readied their beach bods for the occasion. May 26 BEAUTIFUL ACCIDENT In a comedy from China, a lawyer (Gwei Lun-Mei) awakes from a car accident to find herself living a life not taken: She’s a housewife and mother. BERLIN SYNDROME Teresa Palmer plays an Australian tourist who discovers after a fling that her date (Max Riemelt) has locked her in — and not into his schedule. Directed by Cate Shortland (the well-regarded “Lore”), this thriller was briefly the talk of Sundance because of a technical mishap at its world premiere. But some people liked the movie, too. BLACK BUTTERFLY With bad weather on the way, a screenwriter (Antonio Banderas) invites a drifter (Jonathan Rhys Meyers) to take the guest bed at his mountain cabin. It turns out the drifter doesn’t care for his latest script. Knee-jerk “Misery” comparisons may be off: It’s a remake of a French TV movie. Image Eliades Ochoa in the documentary ““Buena Vista Social Club: Adios.” Credit Denise Guerra/Broad Green Pictures BUENA VISTA SOCIAL CLUB: ADIOS The documentary filmmaker Lucy Walker (“Countdown to Zero”) makes a follow-up to Wim Wenders’s 1999 hit documentary, “Buena Vista Social Club,” revisiting some of the same musicians, including Eliades Ochoa and Omara Portuondo. DRONE In an up-to-the-minute home imprisonment thriller, Sean Bean plays a drone pilot who is tracked down in suburbia by a Pakistani businessman (Patrick Sabongui), who wants revenge for the deaths of his wife and daughter. HERMIA & HELENA The Argentine director Matías Piñeiro always uses Shakespeare for inspiration: “Viola” riffed on “Twelfth Night,” while “The Princess of France” borrowed elements of “Love’s Labour’s Lost.” That trend continues with “Hermia & Helena,” which mixes “A Midsummer Night’s Dream” with aspects of Mr. Piñeiro’s own biography to follow a theater director (Agustina Muñoz) in New York. JOSHUA: TEENAGER VS. SUPERPOWER Joshua is Joshua Wong, who at 13 became an activist to protest Beijing’s encroaching influence in Hong Kong. This documentary tells his story. LONG STRANGE TRIP Well received at Sundance, this four-hour look at the Grateful Dead spans the band’s entire career. For those who think four hours of “Sugar Magnolia” sounds a bit too mellow, the director, Amir Bar-Lev, has often made documentaries that dig beneath the surface (“The Tillman Story”). PIRATES OF THE CARIBBEAN: DEAD MEN TELL NO TALES Having already appeared as a Bond villain, Javier Bardem joins the producer Jerry Bruckheimer’s long-running “Pirates of the Caribbean” series as Captain Salazar, a ghost sailor with a vendetta against Jack Sparrow. Johnny Depp is back for comic anchoring; the Norwegian directors Joachim Ronning and Espen Sandberg, are no strangers to the high seas after their foreign-language Oscar nominee, “Kon-Tiki.” Image Brad Pitt, left, and Ben Kingsley in “War Machine.” Credit Franςois Duhamel/Netflix WAR MACHINE Working from “The Operators: The Wild and Terrifying Inside Story of America’s War in Afghanistan,” a nonfiction book by the journalist Michael Hastings (who wrote the Rolling Stone article about Stanley McChrystal), the director David Michôd (“Animal Kingdom”) charts the changing fortunes of a United States general (Brad Pitt) with a dash of Strangelove-ian mockery. Other notable cast members include Topher Grace, Anthony Michael Hall, Tilda Swinton, Ben Kingsley and Lakeith Stanfield (“Get Out”). THE WOMEN’S BALCONY This comedy from Israel concerns the actual and physical fallout after a synagogue balcony where women are separated from men buckles during a bar mitzvah. June June 2 ALL ABOUT THE MONEY A man who goads his friends into vacationing in Colombia has an ulterior motive: He wants to claim the bounty on a drug dealer. This comedy stars Eddie Griffin and Blake Freeman; Mr. Freeman directs. BAND AID A bickering couple (Zoe Lister-Jones and Adam Pally) start a band with the hope that making music will help them smooth over the rough patches in their relationship. Ms. Lister-Jones (TV’s “Life in Pieces”) is not only the lead but also the director (in her debut), screenwriter and co-lyricist. Fred Armisen also stars. CAPTAIN UNDERPANTS: THE FIRST EPIC MOVIE After hypnotizing their school’s principal, two prankster students inadvertently turn him into Captain Underpants, the Jockey-wearing superhero of the comics they’ve written. This animated feature is based on the long-running children’s book series by Dav Pilkey. Kevin Hart, Ed Helms, Thomas Middleditch, Jordan Peele and Kristen Schaal supply some of the voices. CHURCHILL Brian Cox may sound like a more natural fit for Winston Churchill than John Lithgow did in “The Crown,” but can you picture John Slattery (Roger Sterling from “Mad Men”) as Dwight D. Eisenhower? Both Mr. Cox and Mr. Slattery, plus Miranda Richardson as Clementine Churchill, play the famous figures in a film about the road to D-Day. DEAN Demetri Martin, a former fixture of “The Daily Show,” directed, wrote and stars in this film, playing an illustrator who, after his mother’s death, works through a complicated relationship with his father (Kevin Kline). From last year’s Tribeca Film Festival, Mike Hale wrote in The New York Times that Mr. Martin “delivers a winning combination of winsomeness and rue.” Gillian Jacobs and Mary Steenburgen also star. THE EXCEPTION A Nazi soldier (Jai Courtney) assigned to look after the exiled Kaiser Wilhelm II (Christopher Plummer) has an affair with a maid (Lily James) who is both Jewish and a spy. Eddie Marsan (as Himmler) and Janet McTeer add to the intrigue. The director is David Leveaux, a multiple Tony nominee making his first film. HANDSOME DEVIL Two roommates (Fionn O’Shea and Nicholas Galitzine), outcasts for different reasons, begin to warm to each other at a rugby-obsessed Irish boarding school. LETTERS FROM BAGHDAD Nicole Kidman just played the British adventurer Gertrude Bell, known to many as the female Lawrence of Arabia, in a biopic from Werner Herzog . Now Bell is the subject of a documentary that draws on century-old footage and Bell’s own letters. Tilda Swinton narrates. PAST LIFE In 1977, two Israeli sisters (Nelly Tagar and Joy Rieger) are prompted to unravel their seemingly upright father’s past actions in Holocaust-era Poland. Avi Nesher, of the much lighter “The Matchmaker” (2012), directs. VINCENT-N-ROXXY In an update of old noir themes, “Vincent-N-Roxxy” casts Emile Hirsch and Zoë Kravitz as a couple whom circumstances bring together and send on the lam. Romance follows to some degree, but word from last year’s Tribeca Film Festival suggests that violence dominates. Zoey Deutch co-stars. WONDER WOMAN After an appearance in “Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice,” in 2016, that was effectively a trailer within a film, Wonder Woman (Gal Gadot) gets a long-teased movie of her own. Patty Jenkins (“Monster”) directs this origin story, which finds the superheroine leaving her life as an Amazon princess to fight in World War I. Chris Pine plays the pilot who rouses her to action. June 7 ASCENT Experience Mount Fuji — through a selection of 4,000 photographs snapped over 150 years. The Dutch artist Fiona Tan has built this experimental film out of those stills. Screenings at Film Forum in New York will be free. June 9 AWAKENING THE ZODIAC Shane West and Leslie Bibb play a couple who find a 40-year-old film reel that they believe was shot by the Zodiac killer in California. They try to sleuth him out. This displeases the Zodiac killer, who is probably a member of AARP by now. BEATRIZ AT DINNER A Mexican massage therapist and healer (Salma Hayek) and a billionaire hotel owner (John Lithgow) butt heads at a dinner party. This new collaboration between the director Miguel Arteta and the screenwriter Mike White (who previously worked together on “Chuck & Buck” and “The Good Girl”) had more than a few critics at Sundance sensing a commentary on Donald J. Trump. Connie Britton, David Warshofsky, Amy Landecker and Chloë Sevigny are among the mortified faces around the table. CAMERA OBSCURA Suffering from post-traumatic stress disorder, a war photographer begins to see real premonitions of deaths in his pictures. It’s a horror film, naturally. DAWSON CITY: FROZEN TIME In the silent era, the Gold Rush town of Dawson City in the Yukon was the last stop on the film-shipping circuit. The creative solutions used to dispose of flammable nitrate stock resulted in the inadvertent preservation of 500 films — forgotten reels were excavated in the 1970s. Bill Morrison (the found-footage collage “Decasia”) uses those clips to tell a story that interweaves film history and a sociological history of Dawson. 11:55 A returning Marine (Victor Almanzar) is pressed into dealing with old wounds back home, in what — if its title and early reviews are to be trusted — is effectively a replay of “High Noon.” With Elizabeth Rodriguez, Shirley Rumierk, John Leguizamo and Julia Stiles. THE HERO The veteran western star Sam Elliott (The Stranger in “The Big Lebowski”) is cast precisely to type as a veteran western star, who, like John Wayne in “The Shootist,” is prompted to settle accounts after receiving a cancer diagnosis. Nick Offerman, Laura Prepon and Krysten Ritter play figures in his life. Brett Haley (whose credits include another Sam Elliott picture, “I’ll See You in My Dreams”) writes and directs. IT COMES AT NIGHT Reviewing the domestic-discord drama “Krisha,” the debut feature of Trey Edward Shults, last year, Manohla Dargis wrote that the film’s opening shot made it feel like a horror movie. Mr. Shults makes good on that promise with his second feature — an actual horror movie, in which a patriarch (Joel Edgerton), determined to protect his wife and son from a threat outside, must decide what to do about another family that comes a-knockin’. With Riley Keough, Carmen Ejogo and Christopher Abbott (“James White”). MEGAN LEAVEY Gabriela Cowperthwaite (the Sea World exposé “Blackfish”) moves into dramatized features with this life-inspired movie about a Marine corporal (Kate Mara) and the two tours of duty she did with a bomb-sniffing dog named Rex. They were injured in an explosion and recuperated together. Edie Falco, Ramón Rodríguez and Common are also in the cast. MIDDLE MAN We’ve seen plenty of movies about unfunny aspiring comedians (“The King of Comedy,” “Mickey One”), but in this case, the would-be comic (Jim O’Heir), on the road to an audition in Las Vegas, picks up a hitchhiker, with murderous results. MILES Lacking the money for college, Miles (Tim Boardman) learns that he’s eligible for a scholarship if he plays on a volleyball team. The problem? It’s an all-girls team. Molly Shannon is his supportive mother; Missi Pyle, Yeardley Smith, Paul Reiser and Stephen Root co-star. MOSCOW NEVER SLEEPS An Irish filmmaker, Johnny O’Reilly, pays tribute to his adopted city of Moscow with this ensemble film. The trailer at least paints a much sunnier view of the city than Russian imports usually do. Aleksey Serebryakov (the protagonist of “Leviathan”) is in the large cast. Image Tom Cruise and Annabelle Wallis in “The Mummy.” Credit Universal Pictures THE MUMMY Want to feel old? Tom Cruise is now beginning his fourth decade as an action star. Want to feel a bit younger? Meet his new nemesis, a princess (Sofia Boutella) who has been mummified since ancient Egypt, in the latest reboot of a concept that Universal Pictures has dined off since the Boris Karloff original in 1932. Annabelle Wallis, Russell Crowe and Jake Johnson co-star. Alex Kurtzman (a screenwriter on two “Star Trek” movies, two “Transformers,” one “Amazing Spider-Man” and one “Mission: Impossible”) directs. Image Rachel Weisz and Sam Claflin in “My Cousin Rachel.” Credit Nicola Dove/Fox Searchlight MY COUSIN RACHEL The writer Daphne du Maurier has a pretty good track record when it comes to screen adaptations of her work (“Rebecca,” “The Birds,” “Don’t Look Now”), although Roger Michell (“Hyde Park on Hudson”) is not exactly Alfred Hitchcock. In any case, he directs this adaptation of du Maurier’s 1951 novel. Sam Claflin plays an Englishman who suspects that his cousin (Rachel Weisz) is responsible for the death of his uncle. NIGHT SCHOOL Andrew Cohn’s documentary follows three adults working to earn their high school degrees in Indianapolis. RANDOM TROPICAL PARADISE After his fiancée cheats on him — at his wedding — a groom (Bryan Greenberg) is persuaded by his friend (Brooks Wheelan) that it’s time for an all-bros vacation. Survivors of the “Hangover” movies know that this plan never works out. June 14 MOKA “Moka” is indeed French for “mocha,” the color of the car that a bereaved mother (Emmanuelle Devos) thinks killed her son. Wanting revenge, she insinuates her way into the life of the car’s owner (Nathalie Baye). Frédéric Mermoud directs; Switzerland supplies the scenery. June 16 Image Demetrius Shipp Jr. as Tupac Shakur in “All Eyez on Me.” Credit Quantrell Colbert/Summit and Codeblack Films ALL EYEZ ON ME The contours and contradictions of the life of the rapper Tupac Shakur (Demetrius Shipp Jr., in his first movie) are recounted in a biopic scheduled to be released on his birthday. Danai Gurira plays Tupac’s mother, a Black Panther, and Jamal Woolard is Biggie Smalls, a.k.a. the Notorious B.I.G., whom he played in the 2009 film “Notorious.” Benny Boom directed. THE BOOK OF HENRY The director Colin Trevorrow takes a break between franchises — “Jurassic World” and “Star Wars: Episode IX” — with a drama about an 11-year-old genius (Jaeden Lieberher) who, with his mother (Naomi Watts), sets out to rescue the girl next door (Maddie Ziegler), who seems to be abused by her stepfather (Dean Norris). Sarah Silverman and Jacob Tremblay also star. Image Jackson Storm (voiced by Armie Hammer), left, and Lightning McQueen (Owen Wilson) in “Cars 3.” Credit Disney/Pixar CARS 3 In the newest chapter of one of the less-loved Pixar series, the run-down Lightning McQueen (once again voiced by Owen Wilson) sets out to prove he’s still got some gas in the old engine with the assistance of a technician (Cristela Alonzo). Armie Hammer provides a voice for the latest model. 47 METERS DOWN Remember Richard Dreyfuss in the shark cage in “Jaws”? This is the same thing, except instead of Mr. Dreyfuss, picture Mandy Moore and Claire Holt as sisters, and the cage detaches from the boat, sending the pair plunging to depths that make sharks just one of their problems. And to think Blake Lively only had “The Shallows” to deal with. HARE KRISHNA! THE MANTRA, THE MOVEMENT AND THE SWAMI WHO STARTED IT ALL This documentary tells the story of A. C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada , who founded the International Society for Krishna Consciousness, bringing the Krishna movement to the United States. HARMONIUM A prizewinner at Cannes, Koji Fukada’s film captures the ripple effects on one family after the father (Kanji Furutachi) invites an acquaintance (Tadanobu Asano), a recent ex-convict, to work with him in the garage next to his home. HEARING IS BELIEVING The star of this documentary is Rachel Flowers, who was born prematurely and went blind, but learned to play music and grew into a vibrant performer. The film follows two years in her family’s life. THE JOURNEY Dramatizing a difficult moment in the establishment of Northern Irish home rule, “The Journey” imagines that the Rev. Ian Paisley (Timothy Spall), a staunch British loyalist, and Martin McGuinness (Colm Meaney), a Sinn Fein politician and former Irish Republican Army leader, had to share a car during a summit at St. Andrews in 2006. Toby Stephens plays the British prime minister Tony Blair; Mark Lambert plays the Irish prime minister Bertie Ahern. John Hurt, who died in January, also stars. LOST IN PARIS The husband-and-wife directorial team of Fiona Gordon and Dominique Abel, who sometimes work in a deadpan, Jacques Tati-esque comic style, star in this comedy about a Canadian (Ms. Gordon) and her misadventures in Paris. Emmanuelle Riva, who died in January, plays her aunt. LUCKY Lucky, played by the film’s writer and director, Bari King, is an undocumented immigrant who gets enmeshed in a crime web and has to fight his way out. MAUDIE Sally Hawkins embodies the Nova Scotian folk artist Maud Lewis, seen here flowering as a painter while working as a housekeeper for the man she eventually married (a surly Ethan Hawke, in a role outside his usual wheelhouse). Aisling Walsh directs. ONCE UPON A TIME IN VENICE Venice Beach, that is, where a detective (Bruce Willis) goes ballistic after a dognapping leaves his beloved pooch in the hands of drug dealers. (That’s better than what happened to John Wick, who sprang into action after his dog was killed.) John Goodman, Jason Momoa, Kal Penn, Famke Janssen and Thomas Middleditch are along for the ride. Written and directed by Mark Cullen and Robb Cullen, who wrote the script for Kevin Smith’s Bruce Willis vehicle, “Cop Out.” PRAY FOR RAIN California’s drought is over ; what better time to see it represented onscreen? A journalist (Annabelle Stephenson) raised in the state’s Central Valley goes home and learns that the lack of precipitation has turned the farms into a violent gangland. Jane Seymour plays her mother. Image From left, Zoë Kravitz, Jillian Bell, Scarlett Johansson, Ilana Glazer and Kate McKinnon in “Rough Night.” Credit Columbia Pictures ROUGH NIGHT In the midst of a coked-up bachelorette party, the women (Scarlett Johansson, Kate McKinnon, Jillian Bell, Ilana Glazer and Zoë Kravitz) must suddenly scramble after one of them accidentally kills a male stripper. The premise is strikingly similar to that of “Very Bad Things” (1998), which was, according to Janet Maslin in The New York Times, “about as funny as the character who winds up a double amputee.” Fear not: “Rough Night” comes from some of the talent behind “Broad City” — Lucia Aniello, who directed, and Paul W. Downs, with whom she wrote the script. SCORE: A FILM MUSIC DOCUMENTARY Going behind the scenes of how film scores are composed, this portrait of the craft features some of the most familiar “music by” credits in the business, including Hans Zimmer, John Williams, Danny Elfman, Quincy Jones, Rachel Portman and Thomas Newman. June 23 THE BAD BATCH Ana Lily Amirpour follows her breakout debut, the mysterious vampire tale “A Girl Walks Home Alone at Night,” with a dystopian free-for-all, starring Suki Waterhouse as a young woman who is banished to a desert overrun by cannibals and misfits. Jason Momoa, Keanu Reeves, Yolanda Ross and Giovanni Ribisi are among the outcasts. Image Colin Farrell and Nicole Kidman in Sofia Coppola’s remake of “The Beguiled.” Credit Ben Rothstein/Focus Features THE BEGUILED The gender politics of Don Siegel’s “The Beguiled” (1971), in which Clint Eastwood played a Union soldier holed up at a boarding school filled with temptresses, always seemed a bit reactionary. So it will be fascinating to see what Sofia Coppola does in this new version, which she adapted from the same Thomas Cullinan novel. Nicole Kidman, Elle Fanning, Kirsten Dunst and Angourie Rice (“The Nice Guys”) will torment Colin Farrell. THE BIG SICK Easily the breakout of Sundance, this mammoth crowd-pleaser finds the married screenwriters Emily V. Gordon and Kumail Nanjiani mining their own scary life experience for comedy. A Chicago comedian from a traditional Pakistani background (Mr. Nanjiani) and a grad student (Zoe Kazan) fall for each other, but just after their relationship hits the skids, she slips into a coma. He gets to know her parents (Holly Hunter and Ray Romano) during the prolonged uncertainty. Michael Showalter directs. GOOD FORTUNE John Paul DeJoria, a founder of the Paul Mitchell line of hair care products, gets a profile that emphasizes his rise from poverty and his belief in “conscious capitalism.” IN TRANSIT A founding figure of the direct-cinema movement, Albert Maysles died in 2015, shortly before this film’s premiere. His last feature observes the passengers on Amtrak’s Empire Builder route, which connects Chicago and the Pacific Northwest. Mr. Maysles directed with Lynn True, Nelson Walker, Ben Wu and David Usui. MY JOURNEY THROUGH FRENCH CINEMA Just as Martin Scorsese gave us “A Personal Journey With Martin Scorsese Through American Movies,” the French director Bertrand Tavernier (“’Round Midnight”) offers a guided tour of French cinema, from canonical classics to neglected figures. NOBODY SPEAK: TRIALS OF THE FREE PRESS Brian Knappenberger’s documentary promises the inside scoop on the Hulk Hogan lawsuit that led to Gawker’s bankruptcy, and on the broader implications for journalism. THE ORNITHOLOGIST The Portuguese director João Pedro Rodrigues (“To Die Like a Man”) continues to defy classification with this story of a bird-watcher (Paul Hamy) who sets off downstream on an isolated river and, on his journey, encounters increasingly strange company. Manohla Dargis called the movie, inspired by the story of St. Anthony, “the single most delightful and narratively adventurous movie I saw at Toronto” during its film festival. RIPPED After sampling a potent strain of marijuana said to be developed by the C.I.A., two stoners (Faizon Love and Russell Peters) awaken 30 years later, in 2016. TRANSFORMERS: THE LAST KNIGHT The case that Michael Bay is a covert abstract expressionist, taking millions of studio dollars and subversively using them to create symphonies of color and movement that no human eye could possibly be expected to follow, has not gained enough popular traction. Nominally, however, this is just another movie about giant robots. They are joined by Mark Wahlberg and Anthony Hopkins, who is new to the series. June 28 BABY DRIVER No one puts Baby in a corner — but this Baby (Ansel Elgort) happens to be a getaway driver who rocks out to his favorite tunes as he careens through city streets. Edgar Wright’s action comedy also stars Kevin Spacey, Lily James, Jamie Foxx, Jon Bernthal, Eiza González and Jon Hamm. The raves from South by Southwest were deafening. Image An Seo Hyun in Bong Joon-ho’s “Okja.” Credit Jae Hyuk Lee/Netflix OKJA A young girl’s giant pachyderm-like animal friend falls into the clutches of a ruthless corporation headed by a showboating Tilda Swinton. An Seo Hyun stars alongside Jake Gyllenhaal, looking ready for a safari, in what promises to be a wild fantasy from the South Korean director Bong Joon-ho (“Snowpiercer”). POP AYE The first feature from the Singaporean filmmaker Kirsten Tan is set in Thailand, where an architect (Thaneth Warakulnukroh) reunites with an elephant he knew in his youth. And, of course, elephants never forget. He buys the animal and takes it on a road trip. June 30 AMITYVILLE: THE AWAKENING Yes, the asking price is probably quite low by now, but it’s still probably a bad idea to move your family into the haunted house that will forever be associated with Amityville, N.Y. Jennifer Jason Leigh, Bella Thorne, Cameron Monaghan and Mckenna Grace are the new occupants. THE B-SIDE: ELSA DORFMAN’S PORTRAIT PHOTOGRAPHY In a lighthearted change of pace from his interrogations of Donald H. Rumsfeld and Lynndie England, Errol Morris directed this profile of his fellow Cambridge, Mass., resident Elsa Dorfman , a portrait photographer and friend to Beat generation luminaries, who specializes in an obsolete medium: large-format Polaroid. DARKNESS RISING Nearly murdered as a child by her mother, a woman (Katrina Law) returns to the house where her mom went mad. It turns out to be an Overlook Hotel-type situation. Image Gru (right, voiced by Steve Carell) and Dru (also Mr. Carell) in “Despicable Me 3.” Credit Illumination Entertainment/Universal Pictures DESPICABLE ME 3 Once a villain, still a curmudgeon, Gru (voiced by Steve Carell) matches wits with a bad guy (Trey Parker) who has a thing for ’80s fashion and music. There will be Minions, and also Kristen Wiig. Image From left, Will Ferrell, Amy Poehler and Jason Mantzoukas in “The House.” Credit Glen Wilson/Warner Bros. THE HOUSE Two parents (Amy Poehler and Will Ferrell), unable to afford college tuition for their daughter (Ryan Simpkins), turn their home into a casino. Does what happens in the rec room stay in the rec room? With Allison Tolman from “Fargo” Season 1 and Jason Mantzoukas. INCONCEIVABLE A mother who is new to town (Nicky Whelan) is welcomed by a couple (Gina Gershon and Nicolas Cage). Then she grows too close. THE LITTLE HOURS Inspired by “The Decameron” — at least in the sense that “O Brother, Where Art Thou?” was inspired by “The Odyssey” — Jeff Baena’s shock comedy is centered on a group of medieval nuns (Aubrey Plaza, Alison Brie and Kate Micucci) who don’t have the usual compunctions about promiscuity or foul language. John C. Reilly, Jemima Kirke, Dave Franco and Fred Armisen are among the many familiar faces in the cast. THE SKYJACKER’S TALE On New Year’s Eve in 1984, Ishmael Muslim LaBeet, who had been convicted of murdering eight people in 1972 at a golf course in the Virgin Islands, hijacked an American Airlines flight on which he was being transferred as a prisoner. He made it to Cuba. This documentary promises his first interview since the hijacking (he’s now known as Ishmael Muslim Ali). 13 MINUTES The director Oliver Hirschbiegel already chronicled Hitler’s final days in “Downfall.” This biopic tells the story of Georg Elser (Christian Friedel), who made a failed assassination attempt on Hitler in 1939. July July 7 AUSTIN FOUND In a plan that couldn’t possibly go awry, a woman craving celebrity (Linda Cardellini) plots to have her daughter kidnapped. CITY OF GHOSTS Matthew Heineman’s Oscar-nominated “Cartel Land” contrasted a vigilante border patrol in Arizona with a paramilitary organization in Mexico founded to beat back cartels. In “City of Ghosts,” Mr. Heineman travels to Syria to document yet another type of civilian activist group: The movie follows citizen journalists in Raqqa who risk death to document the Islamic State’s destruction of the city. A GHOST STORY The director David Lowery returns to indies after “Pete’s Dragon” with a film that’s more readily experienced than described; perhaps it’s best just to say that critics were entranced at Sundance. Rooney Mara and Casey Affleck (both from his “Ain’t Them Bodies Saints”) play a couple. There is a ghost (a sheet with cutout eyes) and a lengthy shot in which Ms. Mara eats almost a whole pie. PATTI CAKE$ A kindred spirit to the bus driver-poet in Jim Jarmusch’s “Paterson,” Patti (Danielle Macdonald) is an aspiring rapper stuck in a pocket of New Jersey. Geremy Jasper’s debut feature follows her efforts to make it big — and is enough of a crowd-pleaser that you may rap along with her. Bridget Everett, as Patti’s mother, and Cathy Moriarty (yes, from “Raging Bull”), as her grandmother, get in on the groove. SANTOALLA Some time after a Dutch couple moved to an isolated village in Spain, they came into a conflict with a neighboring family. One of the pair disappeared. This documentary from Andrew Becker and Daniel Mehrer investigates what happened. Image Tom Holland in “Spider-Man: Homecoming.” Credit Chuck Zlotnick/Columbia Pictures SPIDER-MAN: HOMECOMING No, Tobey Maguire isn’t in this one, and neither is Andrew Garfield. “Spider-Man: Homecoming” is a reboot of the series, starring Tom Holland — who played the role in “Captain America: Civil War” — as a young Peter Parker. Marisa Tomei plays Aunt May, and Robert Downey Jr. is Iron Man. Sony caught flak for its hiring of a relative rookie, Jon Watts (“Cop Car”), to direct, with critics saying that such opportunities are rarely accorded to women with comparable résumés. July 12 BRONX GOTHIC Andrew Rossi (“Page One: Inside The New York Times”) directs this film version of Okwui Okpokwasili’s one-woman show — a dance and performance piece inspired by her upbringing in the Bronx and centered on the rivalry between two girls on the cusp of adolescence. Reviewing a production in 2014 , Rachel Saltz, writing in The Times, called Ms. Okpokwasili “a magnetic performer.” I AM THE BLUES Daniel Cross’s documentary tours blues country in Louisiana and Mississippi, and features interviews with musicians who are keeping the genre’s traditions alive, including Bobby Rush, Barbara Lynn and Little Freddie King. July 14 BATTLE SCARS Zane Holtz plays a veteran who returns from Afghanistan with post-traumatic stress disorder, with more violence — criminal and emotional — awaiting him at home. BLIND Alec Baldwin, as a novelist left blinded and widowed from a car accident, meets Demi Moore, who volunteers at a center for the sightless. She is unhappily married to a white-collar criminal (Dylan McDermott), and one thing leads to another. Please don’t let the title be a metaphor. CHASING CORAL In Jeff Orlowski’s “Chasing Ice,” a photographer documented the effects of global warming on glaciers. In “Chasing Coral,” a team sets out to capture time-lapse photographs that illustrate coral bleaching, another symptom of climate change that has potentially disastrous consequences for the planet. GRANNY OF THE DEAD In case “Shaun of the Dead” didn’t already milk the polite-British-zombies setup for all it was worth, this horror-comedy finds an Everyman (Marcus Carroll) saving a town from hordes of zombie senior citizens. Image Florence Pugh in “Lady Macbeth.” Credit Laurie Sparham/Roadside Attractions LADY MACBETH This auspicious and thoroughly cinematic first feature from the British stage and opera director William Oldroyd transplants a Russian novella, “Lady Macbeth of Mtsensk,” to 19th-century England. A new bride (the fierce Florence Pugh), trapped in a sexless arranged marriage to an often-absent husband (Paul Hilton), begins an affair with a stable hand (Cosmo Jarvis). Together, they soon clarify the title’s reference to the Scottish play. Image Woody Harrelson, center, Andy Serkis (back to camera) and Gabriel Chavarria, right, in “War for the Planet of the Apes.” Credit 20th Century Fox WAR FOR THE PLANET OF THE APES The events of “Dawn of the Planet of the Apes” (2014) didn’t exactly restore harmony between humans and their evolutionary relatives. It’s time for war, and fearsome leaders head both species’ armies. On the ape side, Caesar (Andy Serkis). On the human side, the Colonel (Woody Harrelson). Matt Reeves, who did standout work in the previous installment, directed. WISH UPON An unhappy teenager (Joey King) has an opportunity to improve her life and get revenge on her bullies when she comes into possession of a wish-granting music box. Of course, there’s a catch. Directed by John R. Leonetti (“Annabelle”). July 21 AMNESIA Reports from Cannes 2015 indicate that this drama from Barbet Schroeder (“Reversal of Fortune”) is partly inspired by his mother. Marthe Keller plays a German woman living in Ibiza in the early 1990s. A friendship with a new neighbor (Max Riemelt) ultimately leads to questions about the past. Bruno Ganz also stars. Image Fionn Whitehead in Christopher Nolan’s “Dunkirk.” Credit Melinda Sue Gordon/Warner Bros. DUNKIRK Christopher Nolan trades the cerebral for the visceral with this epic-scale restaging of the 1940 military actions in Dunkirk, France, which ended with the evacuation of more than 300,000 Allied troops from the French port town but endured as a kind of rallying cry for the British. The cast includes Kenneth Branagh, Cillian Murphy, Mark Rylance, Tom Hardy, Fionn Whitehead and, in his film acting debut, Harry Styles, formerly of One Direction. Mr. Nolan, perhaps Hollywood’s most outspoken advocate for the continued use of celluloid, shot the movie in a mixture of 70-millimeter IMAX and 65-millimeter, the gold standards for movies designed to be seen big. It will show in select theaters on film. FIRST KILL Hayden Christensen stars as a Wall Street broker who, with the best of intentions, takes his son (Ty Shelton) on a bonding trip. But the son is taken hostage by bank robbers, and his father must scramble to meet their demands. Bruce Willis plays a police chief. GIRLS TRIP Overdue for a reunion, four friends (Regina Hall, Jada Pinkett Smith, Queen Latifah and Tiffany Haddish) embark on a wild weekend excursion to New Orleans. Malcolm D. Lee (“Barbershop: The Next Cut”) directs. KILLING GROUND In a thriller from Australia, a camping couple encounter an empty tent and a child wandering without his parents. From the trailer, it looks as if they stumbled onto a crime in progress. LANDLINE Gillian Robespierre, reuniting with her “Obvious Child” star, Jenny Slate, directs this self-conscious throwback to a particular strain of New York dysfunctional-family comedy (there are shades of both “Hannah and Her Sisters” and “The Daytrippers”). Ms. Slate and Abby Quinn are sisters who suspect that their father (John Turturro) is cheating on their mother (Edie Falco). POLINA On the verge of joining the Bolshoi Ballet, a Russian dancer (Anastasia Shevtsova) instead travels to France, because who wouldn’t want Juliette Binoche as a choreographer? Valérie Müller and the choreographer Angelin Preljocaj (of Ballet Preljocaj ) direct, working from the graphic novel by Bastien Vivès. Image Dane DeHaan and Cara Delevingne in “Valerian and the City of a Thousand Planets.” Credit STXfilms and EuropaCorp VALERIAN AND THE CITY OF A THOUSAND PLANETS Twenty years after “The Fifth Element,” Luc Besson returns to flying cars and futuristic cities with this adaptation of the long-running French comic “Valérian and Laureline.” Dane DeHaan and Cara Delevingne play special agents. There are appearances by Rihanna and Herbie Hancock, along with Ethan Hawke, Rutger Hauer and Kris Wu. July 26 RUMBLE: THE INDIANS WHO ROCKED THE WORLD Catherine Bainbridge directs this documentary about the unsung influence that Native American musicians have had on rock and other popular music in the United States. July 28 ATOMIC BLONDE Charlize Theron’s Furiosa was a great action heroine, but could she beat her new character at bare-knuckle combat? Ms. Theron does what promises to be some dazzling stunt work as a British agent in Berlin at the end of the Cold War. The veteran stunt coordinator David Leitch (“John Wick”) directs, from the graphic novel “The Coldest City.” James McAvoy, John Goodman, Sofia Boutella and Toby Jones also star. BRIGSBY BEAR “Brigsby Bear” is the name of the TV show watched by only one person (Kyle Mooney), who lives in an underground bunker. But in movies, underground bunkers don’t stay bunked for long. Mr. Mooney and the director, Dave McCary, are “Saturday Night Live” collaborators. The cast also includes Mark Hamill, Jane Adams, Matt Walsh, Michaela Watkins, Ryan Simpkins and Greg Kinnear. THE EMOJI MOVIE An entire animated movie about emojis? ¯\_(ツ)_/¯ The voices include those of T. J. Miller, James Corden, Anna Faris, Maya Rudolph and Patrick Stewart. A FAMILY MAN A cutthroat headhunter (Gerard Butler) who’s competing with a colleague (Alison Brie) for a promotion finds his ambitions threatened when his son receives a cancer diagnosis. Not to be confused with the Brett Ratner film “The Family Man,” this drama also stars Gretchen Mol, Willem Dafoe and Alfred Molina. FROM THE LAND OF THE MOON The original title is “Mal de Pierres,” which is a very dignified-sounding way of saying “kidney stones.” These stones afflict Marion Cotillard, playing a sheltered and an unhappily married woman in 1950s France who, at a hospital in the Alps, falls for a wounded veteran (Louis Garrel). Nicole Garcia directs. IMPERFECTIONS An unsuccessful actress (Virginia Kull) is persuaded that the way to improve her cash flow is to rip off her mother’s boyfriend (Ed Begley Jr.), who works in Chicago’s Jewelers Row district . Marilu Henner, Ashton Holmes and Zach McGowan also star. AN INCONVENIENT SEQUEL: TRUTH TO POWER Al Gore offers a decade-later update to “An Inconvenient Truth.” Bonni Cohen and Jon Shenk’s sequel finds him once again on the lecture circuit (and frequently stepping away from PowerPoint, at the 2015 Paris climate conference and elsewhere) with reports on both what has changed for the worse and on opportunities for an energy revolution. THE LAST FACE Sean Penn directs this moony global wake-up call, which came in for a historic drubbing at the 2016 Cannes Film Festival. (Even the opening title card — which needed a copy editor — was mocked .) Charlize Theron and Javier Bardem star as the planet’s best-looking humanitarian aide workers, who have a steamy affair against a backdrop of war and strife in Sierra Leone, South Sudan and Liberia. MENASHE Joshua Z. Weinstein shot this mostly Yiddish-language feature in Borough Park, in Brooklyn, using nonprofessional actors from the ultra-Orthodox area. Menashe Lustig plays the title character, whose wife’s death endangers his custody of his son (Ruben Niborski) — a rule in his Hasidic community requires a mother in every household. Over the course of a week, Menashe bonds with his boy. PERSON TO PERSON Shooting on 16-millimeter, Dustin Guy Defa directs this scrappy ensemble comedy set on a single day in New York. The cast includes Michael Cera, Abbi Jacobson, George Sample III, Tavi Gevinson and — stealing the show — the real-life vinyl enthusiast Bene Coopersmith , who is drawn in by the promise of a rare record. STRANGE WEATHER Holly Hunter plays a college administrator in Mississippi who finds out that a friend of her son, who committed suicide, has opened a restaurant chain based on his idea. Carrie Coon also stars. Katherine Dieckmann directs. August Aug. 4 BRAVE NEW JERSEY The residents of a small town in New Jersey tune into Orson Welles’s 1938 “War of the Worlds” broadcast — and like many who heard it live, they don’t realize that it’s theater. The fun cast includes Anna Camp, Heather Burns, Dan Bakkedahl and Raymond J. Barry. COLUMBUS It’s not about Christopher, or even Ohio, but Columbus, Ind., where a lifelong resident (Haley Lu Richardson) and a visitor (John Cho) walk and talk about life and modern architecture, for which the small city is a surprising haven. Michelle Forbes plays Ms. Richardson’s mother; Parker Posey and Rory Culkin also appear. Kogonada, a director who uses a single name, makes his feature debut. THE DARK TOWER Adapted from Stephen King’s “Dark Tower” series — seven novels and a short story published over three decades, inspired by Robert Browning, J. R. R. Tolkien and Sergio Leone — this adaptation casts Idris Elba as Roland Deschain, the last gunfighter in an alternate land, and Matthew McConaughey as the Man in Black, with whom he is in mythic conflict. Nikolaj Arcel (“A Royal Affair”) directs. DETROIT Just thinking about it gets the heart pounding: Kathryn Bigelow, the best action director in movies, reunites with her “Zero Dark Thirty” and “The Hurt Locker” screenwriter, the journalist Mark Boal, for an ensemble procedural set during the Detroit riots of 1967. The large cast includes John Boyega, Will Poulter, Algee Smith, Jacob Latimore, Jason Mitchell, Hannah Murray, Kaitlyn Dever, John Krasinski and Anthony Mackie. FUN MOM DINNER Four mothers (Toni Collette, Katie Aselton, Bridget Everett and Molly Shannon) of preschoolers assemble for what turns out to be a crazy yet heartwarming evening out. Directed by Alethea Jones and written by Julie Rudd, whose husband, Paul Rudd, appears as a kind of artisanal pot dealer. ICARUS Bryan Fogel decided to try a regimen of sports doping to learn about it and to see if he would get caught. He ended up in what are said to be explosive interactions with Grigory Rodchenkov , who helped facilitate one of sports’ most elaborate doping schemes. (Mr. Fogel helped arrange interviews with Mr. Rodchenkov for The New York Times’s prizewinning reports on doping.) INGRID GOES WEST An unbalanced loner with a few screws loose (Aubrey Plaza) becomes obsessed with a social media celebrity (Elizabeth Olsen) and worms her way into her life. It’s a dark comedy, not a stalker thriller. O’Shea Jackson Jr. and Wyatt Russell also star. IN THIS CORNER OF THE WORLD Based on a manga trilogy by Fumiyo Kouno, this anime centers on a woman who moves to a port city in Hiroshima Prefecture one year before the dropping of the bomb. Sunao Katabuchi directs. STEP Amanda Lipitz’s crowd-pleasing documentary follows several members of a high school step-dance team in Baltimore over the course of a year. They face social and economic obstacles amid dazzling dance numbers. WIND RIVER Taylor Sheridan, the screenwriter of “Sicario” and “Hell or High Water,” directs this murder mystery set on a remote, mountainous reservation in Wyoming. Jeremy Renner is a game tracker who teams up with an ill-prepared (yet consistently underestimated) F.B.I. agent (Elizabeth Olsen, in her second film of the week) to find out whodunit. Aug. 9 AFTER LOVE No stranger to stories of domestic horror like “Our Children” (2013), the Belgian filmmaker Joachim Lafosse directs this fraught scenario about a couple (Cédric Kahn and Bérénice Bejo) who separate but continue living in the same apartment with their kids. MACHINES Rahul Jain’s documentary peers inside an Indian textile factory to show the squalor that lies behind the creation of gorgeous fabrics, and the people who create them under such conditions. Aug. 11 ANNABELLE: CREATION A prequel to a spinoff: “Annabelle” (2014) was an offshoot of “The Conjuring” (2013), and this film concerns events before “Annabelle,” with presumably no connection to “The Conjuring 2” (2016). Got it? “Annabelle: Creation” tells the story of how one evil doll came to haunt so many movies. Talitha Bateman, Anthony LaPaglia and Miranda Otto star. David F. Sandberg (“Lights Out”) directs. JESÚS After committing an assault, a teenager (Nicolás Durán) in Santiago is forced to confront his father (Alejandro Goic) in a film inspired by a real-life hate crime in Chile in 2012. THE NUT JOB 2: NUTTY BY NATURE An animated squirrel with Will Arnett’s voice works with his animal friends to thwart the construction of an amusement park. THE ONLY LIVING BOY IN NEW YORK If the Simon & Garfunkel reference in the title weren’t enough, it sure sounds a bit like “The Graduate”: A newly minted college graduate (Callum Turner) contends with both the girl he’s wooing (Kiersey Clemons) and his father’s mistress (Kate Beckinsale), with whom he becomes infatuated. Marc Webb directs from a script by Allan Loeb (“Collateral Beauty”). Pierce Brosnan, Jeff Bridges and Cynthia Nixon are also in it. PILGRIMAGE Any new fans Tom Holland wins from “Spider-Man: Homecoming” can catch him here as a 13th-century monk on a dangerous mission to transport a holy relic to Rome. REALIVE The Spanish director Mateo Gil (who has collaborated with Alejandro Amenábar on scripts for films like “Open Your Eyes”) wrote and directed this science-fiction film about a man (Tom Hughes) with a terminal disease who is cryogenically frozen and then awakened in 2084 after 60 years of limbo. Charlotte Le Bon and Oona Chaplin co-star. THE TRIP TO SPAIN Having already test-run their mealtime banter in the north of England (“The Trip”) and Italy (“The Trip to Italy”), Rob Brydon and Steve Coogan eat and argue lavishly while touring the Iberian Peninsula. Michael Winterbottom directs, again. Image Brittany Farrell (with megaphone) in “Whose Streets?” The film is due out Aug. 11. Credit Magnolia Pictures WHOSE STREETS? Sabaah Folayan and Damon Davis’s documentary, acclaimed at Sundance for its immediacy, captures the anger of residents and activists in Ferguson, Mo., in the wake of the killing of an unarmed black teenager, Michael Brown, by a white police officer. Aug. 15 THE BATTLESHIP ISLAND Scheduled for release on South Korea’s Independence Day, this World War II drama concerns an escape plot for 400 Koreans forced into labor during the Japanese occupation. Ryoo Seung-wan directs. Aug. 16 THE WOUND A factory worker from Queenstown, South Africa, takes a boy from Johannesburg under his wing as part of a Xhosa initiation ritual. When the movie showed at this year’s New Directors/New Films Festival, A. O. Scott called it “affecting and suspenseful even as it hits a few predictable beats.” Aug. 18 THE HITMAN’S BODYGUARD A renowned bodyguard (Ryan Reynolds) takes on the unenviable task of chaperoning the world’s most wanted hitman (Samuel L. Jackson), who has been his enemy in the past. Even the advertising materials for this buddy comedy mercilessly parody the 1992 Whitney Houston vehicle “The Bodyguard.” LEMON This year’s designated Sundance squirm comedy stars Brett Gelman (who wrote the script with his wife, the film’s director, Janicza Bravo) as a 40-year-old drama teacher who alienates everyone around him. Judy Greer, Michael Cera and Gillian Jacobs endure his disagreeable behavior. LOGAN LUCKY It seems rumors of Steven Soderbergh’s retirement from movies have been greatly exaggerated. (He has often been somewhat coy when asked about those rumors in interviews.) And as good as “The Knick” was, it’ll be nice to have him back on the big screen. Channing Tatum and Adam Driver play brothers who plot a robbery at a speedway. Many others are involved: Riley Keough, Hilary Swank, Seth MacFarlane, Katie Holmes, Daniel Craig and Katherine Waterston. Aug. 25 BEACH RATS Eliza Hittman’s well-regarded feature debut, “It Felt Like Love,” dealt with a Brooklyn teenage girl’s sexual awakening. “Beach Rats” is in some ways a male companion piece, about a teenager (Harris Dickinson) struggling with “emotional, sexual and ethical confusion,” A. O. Scott wrote when it showed as the centerpiece of New Directors/New Films. BUSHWICK Shot almost entirely in a (fake) single take, this crafty action thriller follows a young woman (Brittany Snow) and a resourceful veteran (Dave Bautista) as they navigate the violent, mercenary streets of Brooklyn, torn apart after secessionists from Texas start a civil war. That’s one way to reverse gentrification. DEATH NOTE Imagine a notebook, and anyone whose name is written in that notebook will die. The premise comes from a manga by Tsugumi Ohba and Takeshi Obata. Lakeith Stanfield, Nat Wolff and Margaret Qualley star. The director, Adam Wingard, here completes an arc of the modern movie business, having moved from indie horror (“A Horrible Way to Die”) to horror reboots (“Blair Witch”) to Netflix. GOTTI John Gotti, the crime boss and “first media don,” was already the focus of a 1996 TV movie, in which he was played by Armand Assante. In this theatrical film, which covers 30 years in his life, John Travolta assumes impersonation duties, as he did for Robert Shapiro. Mr. Travolta’s wife, Kelly Preston, plays Gotti’s. The screenwriters are Lem Dobbs (“The Limey”) and the character actor Leo Rossi. HEARTSTONE It’s summer in Iceland, and while one teenage boy chases a girl, another begins to fall for that boy, his longtime best friend. Gudmundur Arnar Gudmundsson directs. POLAROID What “The Ring” was to VHS tapes, this movie is to Polaroid photographs. Must horror movies ruin all of our favorite obsolete technologies? TULIP FEVER Demand accountability from Oscar bloggers, who once proclaimed this much-delayed release, adapted from the novel by Deborah Moggach, a heavyweight. Alicia Vikander, as a 17th-century woman unhappily in an arranged marriage (with Christoph Waltz), has an affair with a painter (Dane DeHaan). Together, they enter the Dutch tulip market hoping to strike it rich. That bubble didn’t work out, but maybe these crazy kids will be O.K.? Justin Chadwick (“The Other Boleyn Girl”) directs from a script by Tom Stoppard. THE UNKNOWN GIRL Since “Rosetta,” the movies of the Belgian brothers Jean-Pierre and Luc Dardenne have shown the strong influence of the French director Robert Bresson. In some ways, their latest puts a modern spin on Bresson’s “Diary of a Country Priest”: A doctor (Adèle Haenel) declines to answer a ringing doorbell after hours; when the person doing the ringing is found dead, she sets out to learn more about her — and to find a shred of decency in a sinning world. Jérémie Renier and Olivier Gourmet, Dardennes regulars, are also in the cast. UNLEASHED An app designer (Kate Micucci) moves to San Francisco to get away from her treacherous boyfriend — which sounds like a good plan, but then a full moon turns her beloved cat and dog into men. Drat. WILD Ill at ease with civilized life, Ania (Lilith Stangenberg) forges what becomes an increasingly close and physical bond with a wolf. If festival reviews are any indication, the film is poised somewhere between a tall tale and a provocative social commentary. Nicolette Krebitz wrote and directed. Aug. 30 LEAP! A girl who longs to become a dancer and a boy who longs to become an inventor head to Paris to pursue their passions in this animated feature. With the voices of Elle Fanning, Nat Wolff, Kate McKinnon, Maddie Ziegler, Carly Rae Jepsen and Mel Brooks. THE TEACHER Possibly the most imported Czech filmmaker on the current American art house scene, Jan Hrebejk (“Divided We Fall,” working with his usual writing collaborator, Petr Jarchovsky) directed this satire of Communist Czechoslovakia in the 1980s. Zuzana Maurery plays a teacher whose seemingly innocuous question to new students — what do your parents do? — is part of a bartering strategy. September Sept. 1 DOLORES Peter Bratt’s documentary is an ode to Dolores Huerta, who founded the National Farm Workers Association with Cesar Chavez but is perhaps not as remembered as he is. Ms. Huerta herself is interviewed at length. FALLEN There are no more “Twilight” books to adapt, but Hollywood’s hunger for supernatural young-adult romances is eternal. So here is the first film from Lauren Kate’s best-selling series about a girl at a reform school (Hermione Corfield) who is watched over by a hunky angel (Jeremy Irvine). Lola Kirke also stars. Scott Hicks (who once made “Shine”) directs. THE LAYOVER Stranded at the St. Louis airport after a flight diversion, two friends (Alexandra Daddario and Kate Upton) vie for the affections of the same man (Matt Barr). William H. Macy, who is also in the film, directs this comedy from a script by David Hornsby (“It’s Always Sunny in Philadelphia”) and Lance Krall. TROPHY The documentary filmmaker Shaul Schwarz (“Narco Cultura”), directing with Christina Clusiau, looks at the economics surrounding one of the ultimate scarce commodities: endangered species. Hunters and breeders alike discuss putting a price tag on rare animals. UNLOCKED In an espionage thriller from Michael Apted, Noomi Rapace plays a C.I.A. agent who is on the run and working to stop a terrorist attack in London. Orlando Bloom, Michael Douglas, Toni Collette and John Malkovich are also in the film, but who knows whose side they’re on? Compiled with the assistance of Suzanne O’Connor. Correction :  An earlier version of this article gave an incomplete credit for the photo from “Valerian and the City of a Thousand Planets.” The photo was supplied by STXfilms and EuropaCorp. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page AR 43 of the New York edition with the headline: Sea Dogs, G.I.s and Ballet Divas . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Related Coverage Is the New Mr. Right an Immigrant Rom-Com Hero? May 3, 2017 Image The Five Lies Hollywood Tells Itself May 5, 2017 Image How ‘Alien’ Spawned So Many Others May 4, 2017 Image Show All Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              