   New York Times Watching Logo Search Magnifying glass icon Your Watchlist Search Watching New on Netflix: Movies and TV Shows to Watch This Month by Monica Castillo April 3, 2017 Clockwise from top left: “Queen of Katwe,” “Kubo and the Two Strings,” “The Get Down” and “The Prestige.” Clockwise from top left: Disney; Laika; Touchstone Pictures; Netflix Watching is The New York Times’s TV and film recommendation newsletter and website. At the beginning of every month, Netflix adds a new batch of movies and TV shows to its library. Here are the titles we think are most interesting, broken down by release date. Streaming services occasionally change schedules without giving notice. New to Netflix Gizmo in a scene from “Gremlins.” Warner Bros. ‘Gremlins’ Starts streaming: April 1 Ribbon Save to Watch Heart Shape Like Used to be, when someone asked you what your favorite Christmas movie was, there were some obvious answers — “It’s a Wonderful Life,” “Miracle on 34th Street,” “White Christmas” — but then came the ’80s. And all of a sudden the definition of “Christmas movie” expanded. Now, it could be one in which a shoeless cop in a high-rise goes around killing bad guys (“Die Hard”) or one in which a depressed cop goes around killing bad guys (“Lethal Weapon”) or one in which a teenage girl tells the tale of how her dad tried to play Santa, got stuck in their chimney, and died (“Gremlins”). Feel free to watch this one after midnight. — ‘ Schindler’s List ’ Starts streaming: April 1 Ribbon Save to Watch Heart Shape Like After making totally fine historical dramas like “ Empire of the Sun ” and “The Color Purple,” Steven Spielberg embarked on this more personal and sweeping project, based on the true story of a sympathetic German (Liam Neeson) who saved over a thousand Jews from concentration camps during the Holocaust. — ‘Something’s Gotta Give ’ Starts streaming: April 1 Ribbon Save to Watch Heart Shape Like Who would have ever imagined that a charming rom-com love triangle could be constructed with Jack Nicholson (playing a womanizing music executive), Diane Keaton (playing a neurotic playwright) and Keanu Reeves (playing a hunky doctor). No one. Yet here we are. — 0 [ Read more:  The Best Movies and TV Shows New to Netflix Canada in April ] — ‘The BFG’ Starts streaming: April 6 Ribbon Save to Watch Heart Shape Like Originally set to debut on Netflix last month, Steven Spielberg’s most recent film is an adaptation of Roald Dahl’s fantastical children’s book, which follows a the adventure of a young girl (Ruby Barnhill) to Giant Country. There she meets a big friendly giant (Mark Rylance), which is the only thing that “BFG” could stand for. — From left, Little Hanzo and Kubo (voiced by Art Parkinson) in “Kubo and the Two Strings.” Laika Studios — Focus Features ‘ Kubo and the Two Strings ’ Starts streaming: April 8 Ribbon Save to Watch Heart Shape Like In this adventurous tale set in an ancient Japan where magic exists, Kubo (voiced by Art Parkinson) must learn to use an enchanted two-stringed instrument to fight back against the relatives who killed his father and attacked his mother. Along the journey, Kubo is joined by an assortment of supporting characters voiced by Charlize Theron, Matthew McConaughey, George Takei and Ralph Fiennes. — ‘Mystery Science Theater 3000: The Return’ Starts streaming: April 14 Ribbon Save to Watch Heart Shape Like Make fun of terrible B-movies just like old times, though a new host (Jonah Ray) has joined our favorite snarky puppets. Felicia Day, Joel McHale and Dan Harmon will join the “3000” veterans Kevin Murphy, Bill Corbett and Mary Jo Pehl aboard the Satellite of Love. You can warm up by sampling the “Mystery Science Theater 3000” collection currently available on Netflix. — From left, Andy Serkis, David Bowie and Hugh Jackman in “The Prestige.” Francois Duhamel/Touchstone Pictures ‘ The Prestige ’ Starts streaming: April 21 Ribbon Save to Watch Heart Shape Like In late-Victorian London, two magicians become consumed by a rivalry that leads to the creation of a morbidly dark trick in this Christopher Nolan thriller. The film has almost as many stars as it has illusions — Christian Bale, David Bowie, Michael Caine, Hugh Jackman and Scarlett Johansson. And for a film by a director who has literally directed two movies with the word “dark” in the title, this might be Nolan’s most dour yet. — ‘ Queen of Katwe ’ Starts streaming: April 25 Ribbon Save to Watch Heart Shape Like Ten-year-old Phiona Mutesi (Madina Nalwanga) lives in a slum in Uganda and doesn’t see much cause for hope. That is, until she comes upon a local chess class and discovers a talent for the game. Her single mother, Nakku (Lupita Nyong’o), and an enthusiastic coach (David Oyelowo) stand by her side in this heartwarming tale based on a true story. — ‘Casting JonBenét’ Starts streaming: April 28 Ribbon Save to Watch Heart Shape Like Fresh from Sundance, this meta-documentary for the true crime fans in the crowd looks at the JonBenet Ramsey murder case through the actors auditioning to re-enact the lives of Ramsey, her family, suspects, witnesses and just about anybody involved in the story. — Netflix Originals Mamoudou Athie, left, and Shameik Moore in “The Get Down.” David Lee/Netflix The Get Down: Season 1, Part 2 Starts Streaming: April 7 Ribbon Save to Watch Heart Shape Like This visionary fiasco from Baz Luhrmann and Stephen Adly Guirgis about the burgeoning hip-hop and disco scene in the South Bronx in the mid-to-late ’70s earned mixed notices for the six-episode first part of its first season. But its outsized ambition and gonzo craft made it a true television event. The second half of the season picks up the action in 1978, as Zeke, Shaolin Fantastic and other young artists continue to plug away at their musical dreams. — ‘Girlboss: Season 1’ Starts streaming: Apr. 21 Ribbon Save to Watch Heart Shape Like Britt Robertson stars in an adaptation of the autobiography by Sophia Amoruso, a tech and fashion entrepreneur who experienced a rapid rise to fame while still in her 20s. The series is being overseen by Kay Cannon, the screenwriter for “Pitch Perfect,” whose experiences working on “ 30 Rock ” and “ New Girl ” should make her an ideal choice to tell the story of a stylish, harried young businesswoman. — 0 ‘Dear White People: Season 1’ Starts streaming: Apr. 28 Ribbon Save to Watch Heart Shape Like Writer-director Justin Simien’s 2014 campus comedy, “Dear White People,” took a frank and funny look at Ivy League race relations, with a memorable collection of characters and a scattered assortment of plot lines that — honestly — felt like the pilot for a TV series. Netflix apparently agreed, and is now letting Simien convert his insights and joke-writing skills into serialized form, with a new cast taking its turn at portraying the movie’s feisty college radicals. — ‘Rodney King’ Starts streaming: Apr. 28 Ribbon Save to Watch Heart Shape Like Spike Lee reunites with one of his most frequent collaborators, the actor Roger Guenveur Smith, for a filmed production of Smith’s one-man show about the man whose beating by the L.A.P.D. sparked a riot. Lee previously directed the Peabody-winning film adaptation of Smith’s solo play “A Huey P. Newton Story,” but this new piece is more freewheeling, using Rodney King’s life and death as a jumping-off point for a monologue about L.A. race relations. — Also of interest (from April 1): “ A Nightmare on Elm Street ,” “An American Tail,” “ Tower .” Streaming information by GoWatchIt Have questions? Feedback? Read our FAQs or contact us to let us know how we’re doing. Let’s be friends. NYTimes.com/TV NYTimes.com/Movies Privacy Policy Terms of Service Your Ad Choices © The New York Times Company       