   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Science Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Reactions By  The New York Times March 31, 2014 Athletic Training Ounces of Prevention TO THE EDITOR: Re “ A Leg Up on a Knee Injury ” (Phys Ed, March 25): Establishing a neuromuscular re-education injury prevention program for adolescent and college sports activities is an excellent start to addressing the high rate of A.C.L. tears in this population. However, dismissing a more in-depth assessment of individual athletes because of higher costs neglects those who may benefit from a more thorough screening. Clinically, I have found that if you evaluate individual athletes for deficits in posture, range of motion, strength, muscle length, balance, endurance, body mechanics and power, and design injury prevention programs based on the athlete’s presentation, the risk of injury decreases substantially. The cost for athletes, their families and their schools in dealing with A.C.L. tears is quite high. Incorporating comprehensive programs may be more cost-effective than we think. Caryn Bregman Montclair, N.J. The writer is a physical therapist. Colonoscopy To Screen or Not to Screen Re “ The Dreaded Turning-50 Test ” (March 25): Since I turned 50, I have rejected my doctor’s recommendation to have a colonoscopy. Now, at age 83, I feel vindicated. Maybe it’s useful for people for whom cancer is a hereditary factor. But frankly, I think it’s just another money-maker for the health-care industry. Bob Kruszyna Randolph, N.H., posted to nytimes.com My mother did not have a colonoscopy. By the time they found the tumor, the cancer had spread to the liver. Colonoscopy is not dreadful. Dreadful is to watch your loved one die of something that could have been prevented. B flat State College, Pa., posted to nytimes.com Health care Defining Success Re “ Doctor Priorities vs. Patient Priorities ” (March 27): In the education field, there is much talk about accountability, and threats of punishment for teachers whose students fail to meet certain benchmarks (parallel to health care quality measures, no?) However, that concept does not take into account factors beyond the educator’s control, such as student motivation (or lack thereof), family attitudes, chaotic home lives, past educational experiences, etc. Whether one is a teacher or a physician, the idea that a service provider can be judged a success or failure by the numbers a student or patient puts up, without regard to the individual’s own role in creating those numbers, is deeply misguided. Sometimes our fellow humans will frustrate our best efforts, for reasons of their own. Punishing the provider will not change that, and a system that cannot account for such individual nuances is bound to be deemed a failure in the end — because its own definition of success is unrealistic. Nikki Nassau, N.Y., posted to nytimes.com Science Times welcomes letters, comments on nytimes.com and social media posts from readers. Email should be sent to scitimes@nytimes.com.  A version of this article appears in print on , on Page D 3 of the New York edition with the headline: Reactions . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              