   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Briefing Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Bob Dylan, Donald Trump, Michelle Obama: Your Thursday Evening Briefing By  Karen Zraick , Karen Workman and Sandra Stevenson Oct. 13, 2016 (Want to get this briefing by email? Here’s the sign-up .) Good evening. Here’s the latest. Image Credit Val Wilmer/Redferns 1. He has a Pulitzer , the Presidential Medal of Freedom and Grammy, Academy and Golden Globe Awards. He was inducted into the Rock & Roll Hall of Fame decades ago. And now, Bob Dylan adds a Nobel Prize to that list. The 75-year-old songwriter and musician was honored in the  literature category , a distinction that set off intense debate on social media . Our music critic had one question : “What took them so long?” ____ Image Credit Stephen Crowley/The New York Times 2. Donald Trump counterattacked after several women came forward with accounts of his sexual aggression, singling out The Times for publishing what he called “false smears.” Here’s what our lawyer had to say about that. Hillary Clinton will be off the campaign trail for days, letting the furor over Mr. Trump play out in a race tilting in her favor. Michelle Obama , the first lady, sharply criticized Mr. Trump in a speech, saying in a voice that shook with emotion that his lewd comments about women were “disgraceful” and “intolerable.” ____ Image Credit Associated Press 3. An American warship  fired “limited, self-defense” cruise missiles at Yemen , where Houthi rebels are fighting the Saudi-backed government. The Pentagon said insurgents had fired two missiles at another American warship in the area in recent days. It was the first time the U.S. had become directly involved in the two-year conflict. ____ Image Credit Richard Perry/The New York Times 4. The train that smashed through a station in Hoboken, N.J., last month drew attention to a railroad that has been deteriorating in recent years . Despite booming ridership, New Jersey Transit’s finances have suffered during Gov. Chris Christie’s administration. New Jersey Transit hasn’t had a permanent leader for nearly a year, nor a public meeting in months, and it was fined for several violations during a recent audit. Another headache for Mr. Christie: A judge allowed a criminal complaint accusing him of misconduct in the bridge scandal to move forward. ____ Image Credit SITE Institute, via Associated Press 5. The Nigerian government said 21 of the schoolgirls kidnapped by Boko Haram two years ago had been freed . They were among nearly 300 students kidnapped from a school in the town of Chibok, sparking an international campaign using the hashtag #BringBackOurGirls. Most of the girls are still missing, believed to be held in remote areas controlled by the militant group. ____ Image Credit Charlotte-Mecklenburg Police Department 6. An autopsy requested by the family of Keith Lamont Scott, whose fatal shooting by the police last month prompted days of protests in Charlotte, N.C., showed that he died from gunshot wounds to the back and the abdomen. The county medical examiner’s office has not yet released the results of its own autopsy. Four cameras recorded his death, but none clearly show whether he was holding a gun. We did a frame-by-frame analysis to create a 3-D reconstruction of the moments before and after the shooting . ____ Image Credit Lyndon French for The New York Times 7. Demand for pastry chefs is soaring, but salaries are stagnant . Our financial columnist says restaurants are simply hiring younger people with less training, a dynamic at work in other U.S. industries, too. Above, Emily Spurlin, at work at a “vegetable-focused” restaurant in Chicago’s West Loop. ____ Image 8. Hyperrealistic video games like the FIFA series and Pro Evolution Soccer are changing the way soccer is played . Many professional players are obsessed with the video-game versions of their jobs, and use them to study the moves and strategies of famous players. FIFA, world soccer’s governing body, is expected to decide in January whether to expand the World Cup finals from a 32-team tournament to include as many as 48 countries. ____ Video The Times's deputy Metro editor, Michael Luo, wrote an open letter to the woman who told him to “go back to China.” Asian-Americans responded with stories of their own racist moments. Published On Oct. 13, 2016 9. #thisis2016. Reactions are pouring in after an open letter from a Times editor to the woman who yelled “Go back to China!” at his family on the street. In the video above, Asian-Americans recount their experiences with racism. One man was once asked, “Is your peripheral vision as good as mine, or better? ’Cause, you know, your eyes.” ____ Image Credit Andrew Scrivani for The New York Times 10. Finally, a reader asked if eating fish is good for us just because it replaces red meat. There are other reasons, like: vitamins A, D and B, a host of minerals and protein that is lean and low-calorie. Fish is also low in saturated fat and cholesterol, but high in omega-3 fatty acids. Happy eating. Your Evening Briefing is posted at 6 p.m. Eastern. And don’t miss Your Morning Briefing, posted weekdays at 6 a.m. Eastern, and Your Weekend Briefing, posted at 6 a.m. Sundays. Want to look back? Here’s last night’s briefing . What did you like? What do you want to see here? Let us know at briefing@nytimes.com . Related Coverage Donald Trump, Samsung, Chicago Cubs: Your Wednesday Evening Briefing Oct. 12, 2016 Image Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              