   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Podcasts Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Still Processing Still Processing: The Transformation of Dave Chappelle Image Dave Chapelle performing at Radio City Music Hall in 2014. Credit Mike Coppola/Getty Images By  Wesley Morris and Jenna Wortham Aug. 31, 2017 This summer, Dave Chappelle returned to the stage for an ambitious, monthlong residency at Radio City Music Hall in New York. We saw the show independently, on separate nights. What we witnessed inspired us to dedicate an entire episode to the legacy of Chappelle’s comedy as he works to re-establish his place in American culture. But much has shifted in the decade since Chappelle, through his much-loved TV show, “Chappelle’s Show,” brilliantly explored how black people are represented and misrepresented: Nowadays, he’s no longer interested in speaking on behalf of anyone else. We consider his past to consider where he might be headed and whether we still need comedians — and comedy, for that matter — to help us make sense of the present. How do I listen? Two ways From a desktop or laptop, you can listen by pressing play on the button above. Or if you’re on a mobile device, the instructions below will help you find and subscribe to the series. On your iPhone or iPad: 1. Open your podcast app. It’s a pre-loaded app called “Podcasts” with a purple icon. ( This link may help.) 2. Search for the series. Tap on the “search” magnifying glass icon at the bottom of the screen, type in “Still Processing” and select it from the list of results. 3. Subscribe. Once on the series page, tap on the “subscribe” button to have new episodes sent to your phone free. You may want to adjust your notifications to be alerted when a new episode arrives. 4. Or just sample. If you would rather listen to an episode or two before deciding to subscribe, tap on the episode title from the list on the series page. If you have an internet connection, you’ll be able to stream the episode. On your Android phone or tablet: 1. Open your podcast app. It’s a pre-loaded app called “Play Music” with an orange-and-yellow icon. ( This link may help.) 2. Search for the series. Click on the magnifying glass icon at the top of the screen, search for “Still Processing” and select it from the list of results. You may have to scroll down to find the “Podcasts” search results. 3. Subscribe. Once on the series page, click on the word “subscribe” to have new episodes sent to your phone free. 4. Or just sample. If you would rather listen to an episode or two before deciding to subscribe, click on the episode title from the list on the series page. If you have an internet connection, you’ll be able to stream the episode. Transcript This unedited transcription from the podcast may contain errors. Please listen to the corresponding audio before quoting from it. JW: On today’s show, we’re going to be looking at the canon of Dave Chappelle. His old stuff, his new stuff, some in between stuff — and just a quick warning, you know, some of this stuff is a little explicit, so enter at your own risk. I’m Jenna Wortham. WM: I’m Wesley Morris. We’re two culture writers for The New York Times. JW: I mostly write about how humans relate to technology. WM: And I mostly write about how popular culture relates to humans. JW: This is Still Processing. WM: Hi. JW: Hi, Wesley! WM: Nice to not see you at Afropunk this weekend. JW: We didn’t see each other in person, but we were there together psychically. WM: Spiritual conjoinment continues. Um, what’s going on with you? JW: Okay. So, I have a giant jar of coconut oil in my bathroom. That is a personal salve for my body, but it also functions as a weather vane, and guess what? Guess what state it is in right now? It is solid. Summer is coming to an end. I don’t feel good about this. I’m mourning the loss of summer that I felt never fully bloomed. It was a very cool summer for us here in New York. WM: It was a cool summer. It was a cool summer. JW: So, you know, if my coconut oil goes back to liquid in September and October, I’ll be happy. I just hope that this isn’t the end of the warm weather. Numero dos. We were at Afropunk this week, saw Solange again perform. She does this thing where she dresses in all red. Her backup singers and musicians are all in all red. The stage is bathed in red. And I just...I couldn’t even focus on the music, I was just thinking about the color red and what message that is sending. Let me tell you what I found out. So, I already knew that the color red is associated with the root chakra in Ayurvedic medicine. The root chakra is all about our relationship to the earth, our sense of being grounded, but listen to this. The color red is a warm and positive color associated with our most physical needs and our will to survive. It’s all about self preservation. So, my fall wardrobe is going to incorporate a lot of red. Get ready. WM: Oh, really? JW: Yeah. I’m just taking notes from Solange. WM: I’ve seen you wear red maybe one time. JW: Now it’s going to be all red, all the time, so just get ready for it. WM: Number three. JW: And I’m still thinking about Afropunk in general. This year, again, it’s in Brooklyn at Barry Commodore Park. It was very crowded, a little less indie and punk than years past, and some of the acts they brought in were more mainstream, it felt like. Normally, they have like a ton of black punk bands, they have a ton of black hair metal. This year, it was sort of more up and coming like cutesy little acts that we’ve kind of heard, like Willow Smith, SZA, etc., but despite all of that, it still felt like to me a black Burning Man. It’s a place I can go, kind of let my hair down. Basically, it’s like unhooking a bra strap in my brain. I feel like everything just gets to hang out and be a little bit loose and free. WM: Some people were just letting the actual bra strap go. Saw a lot of free boobies. JW: And more power to everyone that let them fly. But one of the best things I saw there was King, which is a three woman band out of Los Angeles. So funkified, so groovy, still so below the radar, I think, but still so much potential and just so — we should listen to them for a little bit, because they’re so good. But that was three badass black women just jamming on their instruments. Let’s check them out for a second. WM: I will just say, I enjoyed King, but to me what you’re talking about with this indie thing, the spirit of Afropunk to me was coopted by the Solange industry complex, and this sort of very specific kind of R&B. It just seemed...separate from what I think this festival for me was about, which was about outcast black artists who had no marketplace viability whatsoever finding a place to bring other black people who like rock and roll together. JW: Yeah. We’ll table this and we’ll come back to it, because this is a bigger conversation we should have about black musicians, and specifically female musicians because they were all the headlining acts. But anyway, what’s on your list for this week? WM: The VMAs, Video Music Awards, happened on MTV on Sunday, and Taylor Swift debuted her Look What You Made Me Do video, the most passive aggressive pop song I’ve heard in a long time. Nobody’s making Taylor Swift do anything. She’s Taylor Swift! I wasn’t here for any of that. What I was really moved by was Pink, who got the video vanguard award. She doesn’t deserve it for that, her videos are whatever. She does not move the needle in the music video universe, but this is what we got now, because music videos are basically worthless. (Sorry, Taylor Swift.) But I was reminded that among all the shenanigans between whatever’s going on with Taylor Swift and Kanye and Katy Perry, Pink was somebody who was originally sold to us as like, the white Aaliyah. JW: Yes. Yes. Yes. The white Missy Elliott! WM: And they needed something to put forward and they had this white girl who could sing and looked good in a pair of pleather pants. As it turns out, she had other stuff to do, and I think the Pink story is really fascinating to me because she was somebody who was sold to us as a minstrel act, who fought really hard to make the music she wanted to make. She managed to move away from R&B at the point at which R&B was peaking. I mean, it wasn’t that she didn’t have that sound in her music, but she was more in her own self conception a rock artist, and I like that her songwriting was personal and about her own struggles with herself and her demons, and all that other stuff. I, I also love the quality of her voice and her singing. We could play something like Bad Influence from Funhouse...I salute whoever decided to desperately give her something, or give it to her, because she actually deserves it. Dick Gregory died two weeks ago, almost. Really important comedian, was doing stand up comedy about race at a time that it just seemed really dangerous to do. I think by the time we got Dick Gregory, which was, you know, he was a very old man and he seemed curmudgeonly, at least to me, I didn’t receive him as a standup person. I received him as like an elder who had a lot of feelings about what the youth should do. But he was a really, really pioneering standup comedian. I mean, lots of people know this. Here’s Dick Gregory talking about baseball in, I don’t know, the early 1960s. DG: You know, I feel so sorry for Willie. I hate to see any baseball player having trouble. That’s a great sport for my people. That is the only sport in the world where a Negro can shake a stick at a white man and won’t start no riot. Now, don’t get me wrong, now. We’re doing all right. At the rate we’re going, ten years from now, you might have to be my color to get a job. WM: That’s Dick Gregory, he’s really great. And the week that he died, I also wound up seeing Dave Chappelle and his big comedy revue, basically, his big music and comedy revue that was at Radio City Music Hall for about three weeks. I had a really good time the night I went, and it was really nice to see Dave Chappelle eventually, because it took almost four hours, or three and a half hours for him to take the stage. But it was great to see him and his ideas about where comedy should go and what comedy is now get worked out. So, let’s just talk about Dave Chappelle. JW: Yes, let’s do it. WM: I mean, we can spend the whole episode just talking about our experiences at the show... JW: Yes. We both went, we had very different but strong reactions to the show. WM: What it means to have him practicing standup comedy after leaving it for as long as he did after...Chappelle Show basically, after it ended. And he quit the show. And...what it means also for him to be practicing standup comedy in 2017 in the different, fraught atmospheres of political correctness and identity politics, and our current presidency, and what’s different about Dave Chappelle now versus what Dave Chappelle was like... JW: Ten years ago. WM: 17 years ago. JW: 17 years ago? WM: 17 years ago, he had an HBO special. JW: It’s been that long? WM: Killing Them Softly! JW: I’m just thinking about the show, but yeah, you’re right. Wow. 17 years. WM: I mean, he got the show because he was a great standup. JW: Okay, well, let’s walk through it. We’ll talk about past, present, and future, basically. WM: Yeah. JW: The Chappelle Show. Still Processing. Let’s do it. WM: Dave Chappelle spent his August in a residency at Radio City Music Hall. So, you got some standup that started the show, then a musical act, then some more standup, and then at the end of the night, Dave Chappelle would come out and perform for about an hour. So, the night I went, I got Donnell Rawlings, who was on Chappelle Show — JW: Oh, I got him too. WM: He’s fantastic. And then Yasiin Bay came out. Then I got Chris Tucker — JW: That’s wild. WM: It’s wild! Wild! Chris Tucker came out and did a thing for like 40 minutes. And then, Jerry Seinfeld comes out. Jerry Seinfeld comes out and everybody flies to their feet, and just the, whaaaaat? Like the instant standing ovation. You’d have thought they said, ladies and gentlemen, Barack Obama. He was engaged, and he loved — it was such a pleasure to watch him enjoy knowing that he was having a great night, and when he left the stage, he took a look at the audience, and he waved. I mean, it was just beautiful. And then Dave Chappelle comes out. And I don’t know. I mean, I don’t know what Dave Chappelle was like the night you got in, but I actually liked that he was more interested in storytelling than joke telling. JW: The night I went, the format was a little different. So, Solange performed. We got more of Solange than we did of warm up acts. Both opening sets contained a lot of mimicry of different types of Asian identities with the joke being that they’re all basically indistinguishable from one another. Like, there was a series of jokes about like, what kind of Chinese are you? Vietnamese Chinese or Korean Chinese? Chinese Chinese? Filipino Chinese? And I was just like...shocked. It was a very surreal experience to have that sandwiched...you know, between these like, pretty offensive jokes at the expense of Asian Americans and then this sort of rally cry for black women, and then Chappelle to come out and work through what felt like a midlife crisis. And I walked away so satisfied with the whole experience, but I think I walked away also not sure what Dave is so defensive about. Like so much of his comedy up until now has been him setting the tone of what he’s trying to discuss or being on the offensive, sort of opening up new types of discussion about race. Like, this felt very much, he felt like he had to defend where he is in life, and his views, and the ways in which he hasn’t changed, but the world around him has changed. I thought that was pretty interesting. WM: It was almost like a Socratic dialogue in a sense. He was basically saying, look. Comedy audiences have changed, basically. And the question that he asked the audience was this. Why can’t people hear comedy anymore? What’s the audience’s problem? Because I’m a comedian. My job is to tell jokes. And it seems to me that in the last 20 years, audiences have gotten worse and worse at hearing the jokes. Audiences are so bound up in political correctness or ideas of political correctness and so bound up in defending the territories of their identity that it really puts a comedian who practices the elimination of the boundaries around those things or disrespecting people’s personal sense of sanctity about who they are... JW: Yes. And let’s pause for a quick second, because a lot has changed since the last time Dave was doing this. Namely, the ability for people to respond in real time to his art, and that was best exemplified by what happened when you walked into Radio City Hall. They give you a little bag — WM: They give you a bag. JW: And you have to put your phone in it. They lock it with a special tool. So, you get to hold onto your phone, but you don’t get to access it the whole time. If you want to use it, you’ve got to leave the theater, and you’ve got to go to a special phone zone. They unlock the little bag so you can use it, but then they make you put it back into the bag before you go back in the Music Hall. I thought this was a really interesting tactic. Because on one hand, you can argue, artists are getting tired of audiences consuming things via their cell phones. Holding their phones up, taping stuff, sharing with their friends. I also — while I understand that, I have to say, at Afropunk, everyone was livestreaming everything. Everyone was taping everything, and I think for me, it really illuminated that, yes, part of it is documentation, people want to brag on social media, people want to share on social media, yes. But also, it’s about accessibility and availability, and Dave Chappelle is someone who is an important comedian. So it makes sense that people would want to parcel out some of the things he’s doing and share it widely. All that said, we were not allowed to have cell phones, and I think that is in big part because he didn’t want people to be live tweeting the show, and he didn’t want people to be taking things that he was saying out of context, which I think he has experienced the negative side of that. Although, honestly, when you see it all in context, it doesn’t make it less offensive. WM: He went on The Late Show with Stephen Colbert to talk about, you know, the show and where he’s been, and invite Stephen on to do the show, but then, in his invitation to Stephen Colbert, he offers this bonus, like incitement. DC: We do a thing at the show, we do a thing at my concerts where nobody has their cell phones, so all this you know, comedian witch hunt stuff, it doesn’t happen at my shows. I have a wide margin of error and a lot of crazy things get said and done. It’s an opportunity for artists to really flex their muscles without the fear of the repercussions of the overly sensitive. And we’ve all got to kind of recalibrate our ears a little bit so that we can actually hear each other and understand each other, and I think comedy and music is one of the best ways. JW: So, sure, people can applaud that, okay, but that belies a fundamental misunderstanding about how the world works now. You can’t stop people from commenting on the thing that you’re doing even if you take their phones away. WM: I can’t tell whether the taking away of the phones lets Dave Chappelle feel free to practice the kind of comedy that he wants to practice, or whether it is some sort of ego trip to take away the phones in order for us to...he would say, focus on what he’s actually doing. So, here’s what happened though. He makes this declaration about how we can’t hear, we don’t have our phones, and then he goes into what is going to be the meat of this performance. And he does a joke about Rachel Dolezal. Rachel Dolezal, of course, being the white woman who claims that she’s black. And...the problems that many people have with this claim. And he objects to her, to the concept applied to her, that she could be transracial. And then, this allows him to go where you presume this idea is going, which is to actual trans people. And his discomfort with them. I think for a while, a lot of what he wanted people to hear was, get himself out of the hole he had dug in one of his two previous Netflix specials that involve a lot of comedy around trans people. DC: Alright, what happened was, I went to a gallery party. Alright. I don’t know who here has ever been rich before, but these are very nice parties. Uh, you know, wine and cheese, a ball of conversation. And there were a few eccentric types, one of which was a very wealthy man that happened to be wearing a dress. I don’t know what you call a man — a tranny, a drag queen, perhaps? Whatever it was, it was definitely a man. And this man was definitely on drugs. I don’t know what kind of drugs he’s on, but I knew he had too much. He didn’t look good. He looked sick, and all his friends were standing around him, concerned, trying to revive him. I don’t know, it looked like some kind of gay CPR, there was fanning and shit. I saw all this from a distance. Now, I should have minded my own business, but I got curious. I was like...and I went over. All I said, excuse me, gentlemen, gentlemen, is he okay? And then they looked at me like I was evil. She is fine. I said, word up. I’m sorry, I didn’t know this is what we were doing. Here’s my thing. I support anybody’s right to be whoever they feel like they are inside. I’m your ally in that. However...my question is...to what degree do I have to participate in your self image? Is it fair that I have to change my whole pronoun game up for this motherfucker? That doesn’t make sense. JW: The moment I realized that the bulk of the show was going to be about trans people and his reaction to people’s reaction to his first set about trans identity and then realize we were going to sit through this, I became even more uncomfortable. You know, I had this moment where I went from audience member/regular consumer to like, kind of in journalist critique mode. Like I just switch at some point. I stop thinking about whether or not I was enjoying this and started trying to really understand what was going on. You’re probably always in that mode. I can, I go back and forth. In the beginning, I was like, wow, I’m really here for...Dave Chappelle using the vehicle of comedy to work through this discomfort, to work through what he felt was an unfair reaction to his initial comments, and trying to really explore some of the underlying issues that unsettle him about a trans identity and unsettle him about the way gender identity is evolving, and unsettle him about the way he feels black identity and black masculinity has been disregarded... WM: That’s been usurped by the trans civil rights movement, basically. JW: Right. WM: And gay rights. JW: Yeah, and gay rights, which is a false equivalency, but — so, in the moment, I was like, wow, Dave, like I’m kind of proud of you for really owning this and trying to explain to us like, what’s going on. And then I realized, you know, it’s one thing if the joke is not at the expense of people who identify as trans, but there were few moments within that entire set where trans people were not portrayed as gross, as abnormal, as weird and a little bit icky, and I think that’s a really dangerous thing to do because — WM: You’re saying that he was portraying them that way? JW: I’m saying that he wasn’t able to fully lampoon himself at the expense of the joke. He really put the joke on the expense of the weirdness that he feels is the trans identity. WM: None of this was funny, right. And I don’t mean it was unsuccessful in its attempt to make you laugh. I don’t think that the kind of laughter that you expect from certain comedians was what Dave Chappalle — JW: It wasn’t the intention. It was kind of like a Medium essay/Thought Catalog you know, first person monologue about his feelings about trans people. WM: It was therapy. JW: And then he kept saying, I have no problem with this community. I support this community. And I’m like, well...I’m not okay with it, and I came to rely on Dave Chappelle as someone who can use comedy as a tool that is like a, you know, an everyman. You know those tools, I can do a million things at once? I always saw him as someone who could do that — WM: A utility knife. JW: A utility knife for social commentary, social construction. Even like the way we talk about what is PC culture, and the way we think about what we hold up as...as untouchable to talk about. He talked about it. WM: So, we’ll play a moment from the Age of Spin, which is the first of the two Netflix specials that he did that got released this year. This is him talking about his wife’s gay friends, and how much he hates him. DC: My wife’s friend Stuart told me that. My wife has a lot of gay friends. Stuart’s their leader. She has a lot of gay friends. And I don’t like them. Not because they’re gay, I’m just judging them on the merits of their character. They’re just not nice dudes. They’re fucking rude houseguests, they’re sitting on my couch, getting with my wife, eating my motherfucking macaroons, and I come in, they act like the party’s over. Hey, Stuart, what’s going on? This guy talks to me the way a cat could speak if a cat could talk. Hi, David. Stuart, what’s the beef, man? What’s going...he also has some kind of gay political argument. The last one was about a petition in federal court to take the words husband and wife out of the law. I said, well, why would you want those words out of the law? He said, because it discriminates against same sex couples? I was like, please, save me the semantics, just trust me. Take your chips and get the fuck of the casino, you’re about to crap out. Let’s go out, talk that over amongst yourselves, and whichever one of you is gayer, that’s the wife. JW: So, very quickly though, can we just acknowledge something that’s so apparent about Dave in this clip? That when he is really in a groove, he is a maestro. It doesn’t matter what he’s talking about, and the thing that’s annoying is that you still want to laugh while he’s talking, even though what he’s saying is so offensive. He’s so good at the physicality. He’s so good at...intonating just different voices. WM: His twang is — he’s also... JW: It’s so frustrating! He’s so good. WM: I mean, the thing about this special to me is there was nothing in it that was really new. What was in it to me that was interesting was how much insight into where Dave Chappelle is at the moment. JW: And also what we’re willing to let him get away with. WM: Yes. JW: Because so much of his bit right now, so much of the material he’s been working through in the last couple of years is about his own fragility, and it’s very clear he feels threatened, and it’s very clear that there’s a degree of his own masculinity that he’s...maybe not grappling with, but he’s worried about something being taken away from him by the emergence of all these other identity categories he doesn’t understand. WM: Well, the culture’s changed, and it changed it a way that seemed to require Dave Chappelle’s two cents. His five dollars, actually. I mean, he was somebody who, because of Chappelle Show, his Comedy Central show that aired for two official years, I think that meant so much to so many people that it seemed to set him up as somebody who was intellectually and comedically equipped to deal with all kinds of racial/racist situations. But having a breakdown and leaving the show and then leaving comedy for as long as he left it, what do you do when you come back? Like, what kind of shape are you in? JW: For me, the most successful part of the show that I saw was when he talked about going to vote early for Hillary Clinton. And...he talks about how nobody wanted to vote for Hillary, but we had to vote for Hillary, and it’s this very funny thing where he’s like comparing it to all these other things that you don’t want to do but you kind of have to do, and he describes where he lives in Ohio. And he’s like, I went to the early voting polls, and I realized a week before the rest of America would figure it out who was going to be our next president. He goes up to the voting poll, and he overhears all these, you know, redneck-y white people talking about how Donald Trump is going to fight for them. And then he’s like, he takes a pause, he takes a drag off a cigarette, and he’s like, you’re wrong! In that great Dave Chappelle way. He’s like, Trump’s going to work for me, because I’m rich, not you. And it’s just like this really funny moment of, that’s the kind of laugh I wanted. I wanted to laugh, in a way, at something political but not directly political. I wanted to laugh at someone’s...inside joke about poor white people thinking they were getting one over on someone like Dave Chappelle by voting for Donald Trump, whereas he’s like, I’m going to benefit from this more than you, kind of. But...even if that’s not necessarily true. I just enjoyed that the most. And he could have just done it the whole time. This is what my life is like now. WM: So his ego is a huge part of where his comedy is right now. A lot of his humor before...leaving Chappelle Show and going away, it was not about who Dave Chappelle was. I want to play something from the Age of Spin that sort of tells me a lot about where Dave Chappelle is, and like, where a lot of...prominent artists are with regard to like social issues and themselves. DC: A couple weeks ago, I was supposed to be in Flint, Michigan for a charity benefit that was supposed to raise awareness for the appalling condition of the water in Flint. I don’t know if you know this, but the water in Flint is fucking poisonous. It’s actually making people sick. I mean, Hollywood people like, so what, at least they have water, but this water’s fucked up. So, a lot of black celebrities flew into Flint and they did a tremendous charity benefit. Uh, and I was on schedule to appear. So, the reason a lot of people haven’t heard about this benefit — it was the same day as the Oscars. Right, I know. So, I was on my way to the airport to go to Flint, and then Chris Rock calls me and is like, hey, Dave, I got a ticket for you for the Oscars, can you make it? And I was like, sure, I’m on my way to the airport right now. Come on, man! What am I going to do about that water? What am I, a fucking super hero? I need to have fun. I need to live too! I didn’t fuck that water up. Stevie Wonder was there, they didn’t need me. I’m sorry, everybody. I had never been to the Oscars. You’ve seen the movies I make. JW: I hate to admit that I laughed a lot. WM: It’s funny, but it’s also sad because this is the person who...if the Flint water crisis had happened in 2004 would have been on top of it. He would have had a way on Chappelle Show to get at how crazy the water crisis is, and how the infrastructure around...the poor and black people, and poor black people in Flint failed them. But this bit here is, to me...it’s like Superman refusing to go into the phone booth. It’s like Clark Kent being like, I’m going to keep typing, y’all. Let Batman do it. It’s an acknowledgement of abdication of sort of cultural responsibility. It’s also sort of immoral, right? The whole point of that, the night of the Oscars, was to be on the night of the Oscars. It wasn’t an accident. He had no Flint water crisis routine. That was his Flint water crisis routine, right there. It was about he was too famous or like, didn’t feel famous enough previously to go to the Oscars, but now, his friend Chris Rock is inviting him to go — how could he turn it down? You’ve seen Half Baked. I’m never going to the Oscars. I don’t know. It just really bummed me out. JW: But I think there’s something interesting in him working out what it means to be a selfish person and what that means about what he feels obligated to do. I think it’s pretty immoral, but I think I’m also interested in why Dave Chappelle no longer feels obligated to black people. Socially or morally obligated to what he perceives to be the black community. And I think it comes back again to the way he’s constructing himself right now, and that is in response to, I’ve given you enough, and also no one cares about my feelings. He said that on stage. At the Radio City residency, he said, very markedly, the reason he feels strongly about trans identity issues is because no one cares about his feelings. He actively feels like something is still being extracted and taken from him. WM: As a black man. JW: As a visible black person, as a black man, as a celebrity, as a wealthy person, as someone with a platform, as whatever. So...there is a little bit of, he’s still recovering from what it felt like to be so extracted from during the Chappelle years. And I’m not saying that’s okay, I’m just saying I’m trying to rationalize where he’s at. WM: No, but I also think it’s really, really important to remember something really crucial about Chappelle Show. It was a show that ran for only about 28 episodes. There were maybe 13 episodes per season, from 2004 ultimately to 2006. The show became, it became a sort of cultural phenomenon without being a ratings juggernaut, but it was something that young people got something out of. But it’s important to specify maybe what they were getting. It wasn’t as though Chappelle Show was about how hard it was to be black in this sort of universal civil rights oriented way. Dave Chappelle didn’t perform that kind of blackness. He wasn’t that kind of black entertainer. The style of blackness that he pursued in sketch after sketch after sketch on that show — and often with really funny results — was a kind of ghetto black. JW: I mean, I’m thinking a lot about the mad Real World skit, and how liberating that was to see. And in the skit, you have a white guy going into an all black house on the Real World and him adapting to being around all these...hyper black black people. SKIT FROM THE CHAPPELLE SHOW JW: As someone who was going to a largely, predominantly white institution at the time and feeling very policed in how I could behave as a black person and being very conscious of not being that type of black person, to see someone putting that type of black person on TV — and not only saying, this is the best thing going, this is hilarious, this is also very okay...was so...gratifying for me. And I mean, not necessarily because I wanted to behave in that way or that was natural to me and my mannerisms, but just because I was like, yes, there are so many different ways to be black, and this is one, and this is not worse than any other kind. And I think that is not messaging that was in the media at all during that period of time. WM: There was a real argument being made on Chappelle Show about poor black people and black street life that is usually treated with fear and terror, and any pejorative you can put on that, American popular culture basically did that. JW: And then the Chappelle Show subverts that, and I rewatched the black Bush sketch, and he basically takes you know, all these hood N-words and puts them in the White House. SKIT FROM THE CHAPPELLE SHOW JW: It’s hilarious. WM: I mean, there were a lot of places that black comedy just wasn’t going because there was not enough black comedy to go there. And I think that this show was really in some ways about depicting a version of black culture that you never see, but I also think there are a lot of white people involved in the making the show. JW: And I think that’s where things start to take a turn. And we should listen to part of Dave Chappelle’s interview with Oprah where he talks about the moment he realized maybe he wasn’t in on the joke as much as he thought he was. Because so much of the early parts of that show were really about using black culture in a way that was funny, but black culture wasn’t the bunt of the joke. DC: I was doing sketches that were funny but socially irresponsible. I felt like I was being deliberately encouraged, and I was overwhelmed, so that’s like, you get flooded with things and you don’t pay attention to things like your ethics when you get so overwhelmed. A lot of these people traditionally get paid on a percentage basis. The more you work, the more they make. You make that real money. They lost their minds. I thought they were crazy. It was like, you’ve got to do everything. So, I got these things, and I got, you know, your own personal problems that get inflamed when this kind of money comes in, and I got to write a show and do the show, and I was overwhelmed, and it was almost like...I don’t know. It was almost as if this was happening deliberately. OW: Okay. We’ll be right back. JW: I always wondered why Oprah stopped Dave right at that moment. He was about to make a really good point. I guess someone in her ear was like, gotta go to commercial break. But she should have pushed back and been like, let him finish. WM: Well, I got some bad news for you. I gotta pause you there. Let’s take a break, we’ll be right back. We’re going to finish that thought, but we’ll be back in a second. OW: Dave Chappelle is here, speaking out in his first television interview about why he walked away from $50 million and the hit show that was considered the hottest, the hippest comedy show on television. Okay, you mentioned a moment ago that you felt that there were some things that weren’t socially responsible. Like what? DC: Like there’s this one sketch that we did that was about the pixie that would appear whenever racist things happened, whenever someone would make you feel like they were calling you that N word. But don’t say it. And it was funny, and the premise of the sketch was that every race had this like, pixie, this like racial complex. So then when I’m on the set and we’re finally taping the sketch, somebody on set that was white laughed in such a way — I know the difference when people are laughing with me and people are laughing at me. And it was the first time I’d ever gotten a laugh that I was uncomfortable with. OW: Okay. I still haven’t gotten to why you just disappeared. So you had that moment, the guy’s laughing too much. Was that the tipping point for you? Was that the straw? DC: That was the first tipping point. The whole time, they’re trying to convince me I’m insane. They’re trying to get me to take psychotic medication. Yeah. Like I’m sitting around — yeah, I was stressed out, but the people that were telling me I was insane, I believe that they knew what was going on. It’s very stressful for someone to constantly walk behind you and say, you’re insane. WM: The degree to which his personal mental health was less important than to keep his team bathing in money was one thing, but there’s also just how he was feeling the show was not doing the most it could in its depiction of black people and black culture. It is clearly always been one of the tensions in his comedy, which is, how do I tell stories about being in black America as a black person that are funny, but that white people are also going to hear in the presence of other black people. And what responsibility do I have as a black person to treat black people responsibly? Like, we’re not perfect. JW: But can we talk for a second about the pressure. WM: Oh, yeah. JW: On black celebrities in the public spotlight, especially when their work revolves around race, because as I was watching that Oprah interview, I kept thinking about someone like Dane Cook, who...made a lot of really irresponsible jokes about rape culture and women and, but he isn’t worried. I mean, he’s still raking it in. He’s not worried about — not even someone like Amy Schumer, who even to this day is still really irresponsible with some of her racial stereotypes. It’s just interesting to me what it means to be in the minority and the additional weight that it carries. WM: Mm hm. Well, I mean, I think you chose Dane Cook and Amy Schumer, but I would actually pick someone like Lena Dunham. Someone who...in the way that Dave Chappelle has been reckoning with the consequences of his work and how it is received by people, and how you can’t control how it’s received by people no matter what your intentions are. Part of the reason we’re talking about him is that the culture cares about Dave Chappelle. The question is, which Dave Chappelle do we care about? JW: And why? Because people want him to be a savior. He never signed up for that role. And I think what we’re watching is someone back pedaling from that but still wanting that recognition. He’s like pushing and pulling in a really interesting way. I mean, it’s funny the way that show — I’m talking about the Chappelle Show — is such a time capsule in so many ways. You’re right, it was really rough around the edges. It wasn’t perfect. The parts that were good were so good, but I was thinking about the racial draft skit, the first one, which is like so...diabolical and genius, and of course the racial draft skit was a recurring thing on the Chappelle Show where Dave Chappelle’s responding to I guess multiculturalism and how everyone claims multiple identities. People like Tiger Woods, who try to create new racial identity categories. And he sets up a draft in the style of the NBA and the NFL, and lets racists choose who is going to be on their side and why. SKIT FROM THE CHAPPELLE SHOW JW: The brilliance comes out of it because everyone gets to laugh, and no one feels like they’re being laughed at. It’s a moment that in a way, it doesn’t alienate white people, but also lets them into a little bit of, they’re like, multiculturalism works in a way that they’ve probably never experienced or had conversations about. But also, it doesn’t center anyone’s experience over anyone else’s. It just complicates the ways in which we all coopt each other’s identities, and what it means to do so in tandem. And it’s the kind of thing that made that show so good. WM: And it’s that, but it’s also doing stuff like that amazing episode that turned Wayne Brady into a gansta. Let’s play a clip from the Wayne Brady is a gangsta episode of that show. SKIT FROM THE CHAPPELLE SHOW WM: You know, in a lot of ways, black people, we aren’t fair to each other about what blackness even is. I mean, we’re talking about, what about Wayne Brady is any less black than any — I mean, it’s obvious what those things are. I mean, he seems to be carefree. His demeanor is very show biz white. He’s a game show host. He’s not a brotha. Do you know what I mean? And the idea that you would take somebody who...does not meet neither the culture’s standard definition of a black person or like, the average black person’s definition of a black person, and you do something, you make him ultra black is, is so funny, and it’s funny that we’re sitting here talking about it, but you just get the joke in 30 seconds. JW: Immediately, immediately. And it’s also, I mean, it’s a way that I think that show was so brilliant speaking to both black audiences and white audiences in a double coded language. Whereas, if you’re a white viewer, you just maybe are like, this is a hilarious new side of Wayne Brady I’ve never seen, and it’s great and enjoyable on that level. And if you’re a black viewer, you’re like, you’re really thinking about the ways in which black people can turn on each other when it comes to something like what is a black identity because it’s something we’re told isn’t valuable, but then it becomes the most valuable thing that you’re so protective over, and for people who don’t fit into it, they become pariahs in a way. And so you have someone who is sort of seen as that pariah being reclaimed by Dave Chappelle, and also given an opportunity that Wayne Brady’s never had in mainstream show business. Maybe he always had them inside of him — and it clearly came out of a late night Hennessy conversation. Dave ran into Wayne Brady at a hotel bar, and he was like, what’s up, man? WM: You know what? I feel like a lot of us are Wayne Brady in that we are perceived as being these...vegan, vegetable broth, no soul having black people, and maybe it is true. I mean, there are obvious examples of people we still think have that kind of blackness. The thing that he’s talking to Oprah about is really, as much as there are black people who are like that, like on the Real World spoof, that is also so much of how black people are shown to white people that in some ways, it reaffirms — JW: What they already think. WM: And I think that is a lot of what was driving him mad about the response from white fans of the show to the show. It was the catchphrases, it was the impersonations. It was the sort of failure to appreciate all the life and love — in the Prince impersonation, for instance. Or the Rick James impersonation. JW: Frankly — he was doing it with an added layer of satire that was lost on some of the viewers, and I think that was the thing that unhinged him. WM: He and the show were way more sophisticated, I think, than a lot of the people that were watching it. JW: And the network. The network was not equipped to handle that degree of satire. WM: No. They wanted to keep profiting off of it without really understanding what it might cost the person responsible for conjuring it up. He was in a kind of racial draft. Like black fans trying to claim him versus white fans trying to claim him. And I think that can also kind of make you crazy too, because you are just a person practicing your art form, and all the sudden you get into a kind of a turf war or, or, or territorialism over where you should go on the comedy map. That becomes fraught too, because in his case, not only is there art involved, there’s money involved. There’s livelihood involved. There’s personal happiness involved. And it probably was better for him to just...just jump through the trap door. JW: Well, it’s not like the bones of Hollywood isn’t littered with the bones of black entertainers who couldn’t hang. So it’s not that he was, it’s not just that he couldn’t figure out which side he belonged on, but he couldn’t even make the thing he was trying to make without worrying about how it would be interpreted, and how it was going to get parceled out, apparently. WM: Yep. I think now, to have him back, there are terms for his return. One of the terms, of course, is that you surrender your phone when you go see him in a big venue like Radio City Music Hall. What we basically watched him do was dig himself out of a hole that he dug for himself. But instead of digging his way out, he didn’t acknowledge that he dug a hole, he just built a soap box on top of the hole that he dug. So that there’s a kind of righteous indignation he can perform because it’s not his fault that trans jokes didn’t joke. It’s our fault. It’s trans people ruining his comedy by complaining that he doesn’t have a right to represent them. And I think what he’s trying to figure out how to do in the show we saw versus what he did in the first Netflix special was putting himself more at the center of this trans routine, so that it gives him more agency and the trans community less...less to objectively object to, right. Like, these stories aren’t about the problems with being trans, as we discussed before. They’re more about the problems that Dave Chappelle is having with — clearly having with himself and his interest in trans people. We’re not making him bring this up. It’s like you said, like nobody is making him talk about this stuff. JW: It’s just what’s on his mind. WM: It’s what’s on his mind. And it’s such a X ray of where he is, of where his psyche is. So, let’s just play something really quick from Killing Them Softly, his special from 2000. It was on HBO. Dave Chappelle is about 27 or 28 when this aired. And this is him talking about learning, like he’s performing, learning about the police abuse of black people. DC: I’m not saying I don’t like police. I’m not saying that. I’m saying, I’m just scared of them. There’s nothing wrong with that. Sometimes, we want to call them too. Somebody broke into my house once. This is a good time to call, but mm. Mm. House is too nice. It ain’t a real nice house, but they’ll never believe I live in it. It’ll be, he’s still here! Oh my God. Open and shut case, Johnson. Just sprinkle some crack on him and get out of here. WM: So, I mean, this was the Dave Chappelle that was taking off in 2000. And a guy who had a sort of razor sharp sense of injustice — JW: Social justice, yeah. WM: But a sense of like what was unjust in terms of how black people were treated. JW: But I mean also in a way that he wanted to use his comedy to expose that injustice. Man, this happened to me. Man, this is messed up. Because he could be telling stories about his own experiences with the police, but he’s not. He’s using comedy again as this like... WM: There is a joke in his special about his own weird experience with the police, but it’s all through the perspective of being in a car with a white person. And so, I think what’s also very clever about Dave Chappelle and the way that he thinks about race is that different whitenesses were implicated in the racism. Like it wasn’t just, he did a lot of Confederate/KKK oriented jokes and sketches on the show, but also, it’s just like normal white liberals, too. The kind of people who may hold a silent auction on their daughter’s black boyfriend in the backyard of the house one day. JW: This should be his moment to shine. But in your show, when you saw him at Radio City, did he say what he said at mine? Which was — I’m not going to say he apologized for Trump, but he really didn’t take him to task. It came up a few times, and he was just kind of like, we’re going to outlast him because change is moving forward. Like a really milquetoast, you know, like, we’ll be fine, which all signs are pointing to, idk about that. WM: I actually love the mess of his comedy, right. I love that it’s not clean and you might lose a limb on the way out of a joke. JW: I felt that way too. WM: But you’re mostly still in tact, and people like me are going to sit around and think about — I mean, because that’s what I do. Why is this funny? Like why am I about to urinate on myself? And I think that if you can get most of the mess, if you can make a mess and yet convey some degree of what you feel is inappropriate and there is some justice in that, I think there is certain collateral damage that a joke is going to commit to get you there. And I think that is where Dave Chappelle thinks comedy ought to be, and I think that’s where he thinks comedy audiences no longer are willing to be. And I think his perception is we don’t understand how comedy works, and I would say that those audiences would say, well, there shouldn’t be collateral damage in a joke. I don’t see why the disabled and trans people should have to suffer, or like be made fun of for you to make some other joke about injustices committed against black people. There are people who just want a clean kind of comedy that doesn’t offend anybody. And I don’t know if, I mean, that comedy exists, and it can be funny, but I also think that the reason Dave Chappelle is a star is that he became one before the era that we currently live in. I don’t think — we’re at this place of quality agnosticism, right. Like it doesn’t, it might not matter whether Dave Chappelle is good or not. It only matters whether or not people’s feelings get hurt. And I think that he wants, he doesn’t want to practice that kind of comedy, but he’s also just as much interested in safe spaces as the people who go to his shows. JW: Yeah. Well, that’s the inherent irony is that Dave wants a safe space to do his work, but also, in asking for that, he’s also asking that people not be critical of the things that he’s saying, which you don’t get it both ways. You actually don’t get it both ways. And I think — WM: But do we get it both ways? Because I feel like can an audience — JW: I don’t know that Dave is in line with how audiences have evolved or changed. It’s true the culture has changed. It’s true that we’re having much more in depth and much more vocal and much more...harder to ignore conversations about cultural identities and the politics of identities and the politics of language in particular and who...gets to laugh at whom. And comedy is supposed to be about making people uncomfortable in the hopes that you get somewhere more interesting and add some levity to this thing called life, and we all get to look at the stuff that we take too seriously or not seriously enough or for granted and laugh at it. That’s kind of my, the way I think about the point of standup and live comedy is supposed to do. But Dave cannot — it seems like he hasn’t been able to adapt to the reality that not everybody likes him, and he’s not as universally revered. He doesn’t have a chorus of yes men telling him he’s a genius anymore, because the internet exists now. Do we still need a Dave Chappelle? Yes. Do we need Dave Chappelle? Not necessarily. WM: But I think that the question is what do we need from him? JW: Watching someone who does not understand the world in 2017 try to make peace with that and get somewhere different, I think there has to be space for. WM: That’s our show. JW: That’s our Chappelle show. Wesley Morris is a critic at large for The New York Times and a staff writer for The New York Times Magazine. Jenna Wortham is a staff writer for the magazine.  Sign up for our newsletter to get the best of The New York Times Magazine delivered to your inbox every week. Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              