   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Business Day Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by It’s the U.N.’s Week, but Executives Make It a High-Minded Mingle Image Lloyd Blankfein, center, chairman and chief executive of Goldman Sachs, speaking at the inaugural Bloomberg Global Business Forum with Ian Bremmer, left, president of Eurasia Group, and Yasir Al Rumayyan, chief executive of the Public Investment Fund of Saudi Arabia. Credit Andrew Gombert/European Pressphoto Agency By  David Gelles Sept. 21, 2017 What do you get when you combine more than 100 heads of state, a few hundred chief executives and several thousand hangers-on in Midtown Manhattan? Besides a traffic jam, it is the United Nations General Assembly week in New York, also known as #UNGA. Or it’s the Concordia Summit. Or it’s Climate Week . Or it’s the Clinton Global Initiative, except now that event is gone , replaced this year by the inaugural Bloomberg Global Business Forum. “I don’t even know what to call this week anymore,” said Valerie Keller, head of the Beacon Institute, a division of EY, the accounting firm. “It’s everything.” What began as a bureaucratic gathering of diplomats at the United Nations has in recent years morphed into a business and political free-for-all, a champagne-soaked workweek of panel discussions, private dinners and high-minded pronouncements of important initiatives. Among the many business leaders making appearances are Tim Cook of Apple, Bill and Melinda Gates, and Jack Ma, the founder and executive chairman of Alibaba. Image President Barack Obama, Melinda Gates and Bill Gates spoke at Goalkeepers 2017, an event hosted by the Gates’s foundation, at Jazz at Lincoln Center on Wednesday in New York. Credit Jamie Mccarthy/Getty Images For those who fancy themselves important actors on the world stage, the gravitational pull to New York City this week is strong, and each year, more new events are added to an already overstuffed schedule, providing more excuses to show up, and adding a few more black S.U.V.s to the crowded streets. Ms. Keller made her own contribution to the social circuit. On Monday night, the Beacon Institute hosted a “nightcap” at the Museum of Modern Art in conjunction with the B-Team , a self-selecting group of progressive business leaders. Sipping cocktails and nibbling canapés on a terrace overlooking the MoMA sculpture garden, the 150 or so guests were entertained by the musician Butterscotch, a “retro-futuristic, voice percussionist virtuosa,” as her website says. Among those in attendance were Dara Khosrowshahi, the new chief executive of Uber; Richard Branson of the Virgin Group; and Arianna Huffington. The goal, the invitation proclaimed, was “to help galvanize a movement of businesses with purpose at their heart.” But what does that mean? What comes of so much shoulder-rubbing? “I ask myself that,” Ms. Keller said. “What’s the point? Are we just throwing a purpose party?” Image Arianna Huffington and Marc S. Pritchard, chief brand officer of Procter & Gamble, at the Global Citizen: Movement Makers event at New York University’s Rosenthal Pavilion on Tuesday. Credit Theo Wargo/Getty Images for Global Citizen Perhaps. But Ms. Keller argued that there was intrinsic merit simply in bringing together like-minded people who aspire to make capitalism a bit more equitable. “Actually, there is real value in all these individual points of light coming together and saying there is a collective vision for a world that works for everyone and an economic system that works for all, including our planet,” she said. “If you collide enough of the people that care about these issues, they start remembering that this is real and it’s happening.” Ms. Keller and the B-Team steered clear of making any tangible promises on Monday, but others were more than happy to use the collective attention of the global press corps to announce grand new projects. The Concordia Summit , an event started just seven years ago, drew some 3,000 attendees to the Grand Hyatt above Grand Central Terminal this week. On Tuesday, Mastercard used the Summit to announce a new partnership with the President’s Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief aimed at reducing the spread of HIV and AIDS. Such public-private partnerships were the bread and butter of the Clinton Global Initiative, which ran for more than a decade. Last year former President Bill Clinton and Hillary Clinton announced they would end it as she campaigned for president, prompting Michael R. Bloomberg, the former mayor of New York City, to step in with his own global forum. Image Tim Cook, the chief executive of Apple, was among the high-profile speakers at the Bloomberg Global Business Forum. Credit Andrew Gombert/European Pressphoto Agency The Bloomberg event on Wednesday, hosted at the opulent Plaza Hotel, drew some of the biggest names in town, including the Canadian prime minister, Justin Trudeau; Mr. Ma of Alibaba; the PepsiCo chief executive, Indra K. Nooyi; and Mr. Clinton himself, who delivered the opening remarks. Travis Kalanick, the recently departed chief executive of Uber, roamed the halls. “The Clinton Global Initiative caused business to think about New York this week as a destination,” said Darren Walker, the president of the Ford Foundation. “The end of CGI left a void, and this is filling that.” If any theme emerged from the conversations onstage and in press room briefings, it was that the business world had an opportunity to demonstrate some moral leadership on policy issues ranging from immigration to climate change. Mr. Cook, Apple’s chief executive, said that if he were a head of state, “I’d want every smart person coming into my country.” “Smart people create jobs,” he said onstage, in an allusion to immigration policy. “I’d have a very aggressive plan not to just let a few people in. I would be recruiting.” Image Warren Buffett joined business leaders Tuesday at the Forbes 100th Anniversary gala at Pier 60. Credit Andy Kropa/Invision, via Associated Press Ajay Banga, the chief executive of Mastercard, said he was using the day to speak with peers about the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals, a set of targets meant to improve quality of living for people around the world. “They’ve convened good conversations with people who are deeply committed to the SDGs,” Mr. Banga said in an interview on the sidelines of the event. “The SDGs really matter. More people should be thinking about them.” Not all the dialogue was so serious, however. During an afternoon session, David Rubenstein, the billionaire founder of the private equity firm Carlyle Group, asked Mr. Gates, the Microsoft co-founder, if his financial support for medical advances meant people would live longer. “I’m not working on that problem,” Mr. Gates said. “There are other Silicon Valley billionaires who want to live forever.” As the Bloomberg event wrapped up Wednesday afternoon, Hamdi Ulukaya, the founder of Chobani , proclaimed himself satisfied with the dialogue. “The issue isn’t whether we can solve poverty or climate change or income inequality,” he said. “It’s whether or not we can work together. The willingness to just get together and talk — that’s why we’re here.” But Mr. Ulukaya had to run. On Thursday, his charity for refugees, the Tent Foundation, was hosting an event announcing new partnerships and featuring the Unilever chief executive, Paul Polman, and Airbnb’s co-founder, Joe Gebbia. There were last-minute preparations to attend to. After that, of course, was a private dinner. Follow David Gelles on Twitter @dgelles  A version of this article appears in print on , on Page B 3 of the New York edition with the headline: Outside the U.N., a Week of High-Minded Galas . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Related Coverage As the Clintons Step Back From Global Stage, Bloomberg Steps Up Sept. 19, 2017 Image At U.N. General Assembly, Signing a Nuclear Pact and Debating Another Sept. 20, 2017 Image The Moral Voice of Corporate America Aug. 19, 2017 Image Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              