   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Television Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by The Alienist ‘The Alienist’ Season 1, Episode 9: The Doctor Is Out Image Dakota Fanning in “The Alienist.” Credit Kata Vermes/TNT By  Sean T. Collins March 19, 2018 Season 1, Episode 9: ‘Requiem’ Ever feel like you get more done when the boss isn’t around? From this, a workplace truth that for many seems self-evident (unless you’re the boss, naturally), “The Alienist” concocts another week of investigative breakthroughs. By the end of this episode, Dr. Laszlo Kreizler’s motley crew of pro-am criminologists is closer than ever to capturing its quarry, the relentless child-killer whose stylized murders have been baffling and revealing in equal measure. But there’s one major difference in their pursuit this time around: Dr. Kreizler is not a participant. The progress made by Sara Howard, John Moore, and the Isaacson brothers in the absence of their mercurial mentor is a surprise only in terms of the centrality Kreizler was given by the story before now. Considering all we’ve learned about his methods and mien this season, it’s more of a shock that they got anything done before. Now, with Laszlo housebound by grief, there are no angry, object-throwing outbursts to contend with, no dredging up of painful memories of drowning brothers and faithless fiancées and suicidal fathers, no slaps to the face when someone like Sara has the temerity to suggest that healing oneself should be any physician’s first order of business (or any alienist’s). It’s hard to believe, given the unmistakable evaporation of all that interpersonal drama, but it wasn’t so long ago that Kreizler came across like the most reasonable genius in the genre , let alone the room. To be fair, the doctor’s erstwhile acolytes are working with tools he provided. As Laszlo might have done, they puzzle over the symbolic significance of the killer’s pseudonym and study the Christian calendar for significant clues. But without the skills they bring to the table themselves, they never would have been able to track down the killer’s apartment and confirm his identity. He does, indeed, appear to be Japheth Dury, the abused preacher’s son turned predatory census-taker and part-time leg-breaker for a local bookie. He is also, as we began to understand last week , operating under the name “John Beecham,” the surname stolen from a man who raped Japheth before he retaliated by cutting his throat and throwing him off a cliff. To ferret this out required John’s rapport with street kids and his knack for sketch artistry; Sara’s attention to detail and her research skills among the vast census records; and the Isaacsons’ badge-flashing, lock-picking, witness-interrogating police work. It all leads to the grimmest discovery of the season, coupled with its goriest onscreen moments. While John’s young friend Joseph listens in horror, Beecham butchers one of his friends in the public baths, dragging his bloody corpse down the hall and off to whatever urban aerie will become this latest victim’s chosen resting place. At the same time, in the killer’s bedroom, Sara opens a heart-shaped box and discovers an actual human heart, while Marcus Isaacson uncovers a jar filled with human eyeballs — many more, it’s clear, than the known victims could have provided. It’s an awesome, awful image, one that easily transcends its B-movie-prop connotations because of what it enables both the investigators and the audience to truly see. Each of these gross little chunks of nerve and tissue, floating in a jar stuffed away under bed, represents the life of a child, plucked out at the root. What’s more, each of the victims came from the immigrant underclass; the killer groomed them all by commiserating over their abusive, hated fathers. (In the victims’ cases, many of their dads were also neglectful gambling addicts, which Beecham was in a position to know through his gig as a debt collector.) In a grotesque sense, the murderer values them more than anyone else ever has. But before we turn to next week’s finale and close the book on the killer, let’s return to his primary hunter. Kreizler is more intriguing in his absence from the plot than he has been in person — and for quite some time. It’s hard to think of a more effective way to establish the bone-deep truth of his affection for Mary, for example, than the way it’s portrayed in the funeral scene that opens in the episode: Laszlo, in close-up profile, staring at the grave without really seeing or hearing the mourners who approach him one by one to pay their respects, hovering just out of focus. (Cinematically, it’s a simple technique, but all the stronger for it.) The show plays similar tricks with blurred visibility to convey Kreizler’s despair and isolation when his friend and colleague John Moore comes calling at his house to share the latest news of the investigation: Both men can only see each other through the semi-opaque panes of glass in Laszlo’s doorway — just enough for the doctor to recognize his visitor, and for his visitor to recognize that the doctor has chosen not to let him in. Finally, we get closer than ever to the truth of Kreizler’s traumatic past when, while drinking alone, he stares at a family portrait taken when he was a youngster — his injured right harm hidden carefully behind his posing parents. “Was I too loud, Papi?” he asks his father’s image, in reference, no doubt, to his youthful passion for piano and perhaps to some punishment that incurred. “You were right,” he continues. “I’m just a little impostor.” He toasts his father with his working arm, then smashes the glass and jabs the broken stem into his damaged limb. Evidently the killer and his victims aren’t the only ones who understand how it feels to hate one’s father more than anything in the world. Kreizler is one of them, too. With the finale approaching, will it take one to catch one? Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              