   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Weddings Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Julia Morton, Andrew Mannik Image Sept. 24, 2017 Julia Elizabeth Bennett Morton and Andrew Nicholas Mannik were married Sept. 23 at the Gramercy Park Hotel in New York. Jon Dick, a friend of the couple who was ordained by the American Marriage Ministries for the event, officiated. The bride, 32, and the groom, 33, met at Harvard, from which the bride graduated and each received an M.B.A. The bride is the senior director of customer success in New York for Flatiron Health, a technology company working with cancer patients and oncologists to improve treatment and accelerate research. She is a daughter of Susan M. B. Morton and Grant L. Morton of Auckland, New Zealand. The bride’s father was a freelance management consultant in Auckland and London. Her mother is a physician and associate professor of public health and biostatistics at the University of Auckland, where she specializes in maternal health. The groom, is a director at Claar Advisors, an investment firm in New York. He graduated from Queens University. He is the son of Silvana T. Mannik and Steven J. Mannik of Bonita Springs, Fla. The groom’s mother retired as an assistant vice president at John Hancock in Boston. His father retired as the president and chief executive in Stamford, Conn., at the Gen Re Life Corporation. The couple were introduced in May 2011 by Mr. Dick, who was a business school classmate, when they all attended the Newport Ball in Newport, R.I. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page ST 16 of the New York edition with the headline: Julia Morton,  Andrew Mannik . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              