   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Book Review Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by The Shortlist Four Timely Memoirs from the Halls of Medicine Image Credit John Gall By  Rachel Pearson June 27, 2017 HUNDREDS OF INTERLACED FINGERS A Kidney Doctor’s Search for the Perfect Match  By Vanessa Grubbs 261 pp. Amistad, $25.99 Image Grubbs’s book is unusual among physician memoirs in that it is a love story: The author was a primary care doctor when she fell in love with a man with kidney disease. After donating her own kidney to her now-husband, she became a nephrologist. Grubbs also discusses the effects of racial bias in medicine — which she has encountered as a physician-researcher and a woman of color. Doctors are less likely to refer patients of color for transplant in a timely manner, and transplants used to be allocated on a “first referred, first served” basis. But the problem has been best addressed not by physicians confronting our own bias, but by policy. A 2014 change to the kidney allocation rules essentially considers patients to have been on the transplant list from the time they began dialysis. This policy has done much to ameliorate the racial injustice in kidney transplant. Grubbs’s timely, affecting tale reminds us that we are all welcome to attempt to work beyond our inherent biases. But until universal consciousness-raising takes full and wondrous effect, we need strong anti-racist public and institutional policies. Without them, on the kidney transplant list as elsewhere in society, Americans of color will continue to die early, tragic and preventable deaths. HEALING CHILDREN A Surgeon’s Stories From the Frontiers of Pediatric Medicine  By Kurt Newman 262 pp. Viking, $27. Image Newman, a pediatric surgeon, argues that seriously ill and injured children are better served at pediatric hospitals than at adult hospitals — a claim generally supported by the data showing that kids with bone fractures, brain injury and severe sepsis do best when pediatric specialists manage their care. But he makes his case through stories of ill children who were languishing in the care of adult or community providers only to be rescued (often by Newman himself). In one instance, a friend called Newman from the neonatal I.C.U. of a community hospital, where his newborn son was vomiting bile. Newman recognized the danger and arranged an ambulance to bring the boy to Children’s National, where the boy was saved but faced a prolonged hospital stay. Newman captures the beautiful collegiality of pediatric medicine and the wisdom of parents and of children themselves, as in this description of a young patient with intestinal failure: “He thought more about his parents’ suffering than his own. As a human being, he put me to shame.” Newman also lionizes big donors, and I could not help reading the book as in part a veiled plea for more donations to Children’s National. If this is the book’s goal, I hope it succeeds. The kids Newman describes are themselves heroic, and they deserve nothing but the best. OPEN HEART A Cardiac Surgeon’s Stories of Life and Death on the Operating Table  By Stephen Westaby 287 pp. Basic Books, $27. Image Westaby’s book will be a balm to the hearts of curmudgeons everywhere. Sidestepping the contemporary hand-wringing about the lack of empathy in medicine, Westaby, a British surgeon, positions empathy as a threat to the surgical career: “Heart surgery,” he writes, “needs to be an impersonal, technical exercise.” Westaby learned this lesson young, when desperately trying — and failing — to save the life of a child. Refreshingly, Westaby does not put a positive spin on suffering or cleave to false optimism. “The Grim Reaper perches on every surgeon’s shoulder. Death is always definitive. No second chances.” The deaths that truly madden him are those that could have been prevented by available technologies not then funded by the British National Health Service (N.H.S.), his employer. Westaby himself is a pioneer in the development and use of implantable ventricular assist devices — little machines that pump blood for a failing heart. When charity funding for these new devices runs out, Westaby finds himself “in the unenviable position of having to sit back and watch patients die — people I once could have saved.” As a young doctor who imagines nationalized medicine as a way toward comprehensive care for all my patients, I was taken aback. I too have watched patients — uninsured Americans — die of treatable disease. The book is a reminder that nationalized medicine might ease the racial and economic injustices that currently determine which people die too soon, but it wouldn’t spell the end of medically preventable deaths. SOMETIMES AMAZING THINGS HAPPEN Heartbreak and Hope on the Bellevue Hospital Psychiatric Prison Ward  By Elizabeth Ford 247 pp. Regan Arts, $27.95. Image Ford is a psychiatrist who cares for mentally ill prisoners. Her book testifies to the kind of love that physicians can offer: a dogged, practical devotion that leaves us missing birthdays, going sleepless and — in Ford’s case — driving across a closed bridge toward Manhattan to secure safe care for prisoners who have been stranded by Hurricane Sandy. She coolly describes acts of care like walking into a room to comfort agitated, psychotic men twice her size. Happily, Ford is human here, and thus imperfect. She describes burning out, her failings as a parent and her inability to care for patients who have seriously harmed children after she herself becomes a mother. Motherhood also imbues her with a new authority in her care, and she discovers that the body of a pregnant physician incites moments of human connection with patients. Ford’s bravery emerges not only in acts of clinical devotion but also in some light critique of the tense relationship between medicine and law enforcement. She describes how some correctional officers embedded in her psychiatric unit antagonize patients and occasionally thwart care. She also describes being devastated upon learning exactly how a patient was severely beaten during a “takedown” in the unit. This is not an exposé, however — and Ford is still an employee of Correctional Health Services — so she does not reveal whether the man was injured by a correctional officer or by psychiatric staff. The story is graphic and real but, as in most physician memoirs, details are withheld. Rachel Pearson is a resident pediatrician and the author of “No Apparent Distress: A Doctor’s Coming-of-Age on the Front Lines of American Medicine.”   A version of this article appears in print on , on Page 26 of the Sunday Book Review with the headline: Medical Memoirs . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              