   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Movies Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Summer Movie Release Schedule 2016 Image Asier Etxeandia and Penélope Cruz in Julio Medem’s “Ma Ma.” Credit Oscilloscope Laboratories By  Anita Gates April 29, 2016 All dates are subject to change. May May 4 A BIGGER SPLASH Can’t a rock superstar be left alone to hide out on a Mediterranean island with her throat ailment and her young filmmaker boyfriend? Tilda Swinton stars as the rocker, Matthias Schoenaerts is her partner, and Ralph Fiennes is an old flame, a record producer, who shows up with his sexy, long-lost daughter (Dakota Johnson). Luca Guadagnino directed this drama. When it was at the Venice Film Festival, The Telegraph called it a “feast for the eyes and mind.” SIN ALAS The title, in Spanish, means “Without Wings.” A Cuban story of lost love, between a writer and a dancer, and lost idealism, covering decades of the nation’s modern history. Ben Chace wrote and directed. Summer Movies Preview: 10 Trailers for May Superheroes, politicians and a few angry birds are coming to the big screen this month. May 5, 2016 May 6 BEAUTIFUL SOMETHING Four artsy-literate guys look for sex, love and identity in Philadelphia in this romantic drama. Colman Domingo, Brian Sheppard, Zack Ryan and John Lescault star. Joseph Graham wrote and directed. BEING CHARLIE Rob Reiner directed this romantic drama written by his son Nick Reiner and Matt Elisofon about an 18-year-old who keeps running away from rehab. But the kid has a stressful life: His father is a former movie star trying to get elected governor of California. Starring Nick Robinson (as Charlie) and Morgan Saylor. BELLADONNA OF SADNESS Made in 1973 but apparently never released in the United States, Eiichi Yamamoto’s animated Japanese fantasy drama tells the story of an innocent young woman who makes a deal with the Devil. She wants revenge on the local lord who raped her on her wedding night . Image Elizabeth Olsen, left, Chris Evans, center, and Sebastian Stan in “Captain America: Civil War.” Credit Disney/Marvel CAPTAIN AMERICA: CIVIL WAR When the government cracks down on the Avengers, Iron Man (Robert Downey Jr.) surprises everybody by supporting the new regulations. Now it’s him against Captain America (Chris Evans), and the superheroes divide into two camps. The cast also includes Scarlett Johansson, Sebastian Stan and Anthony Mackie. Anthony and Joe Russo directed. Lots of things blow up. CODE OF HONOR Steven Seagal stars in a bloody revenge drama. When his character’s family is killed in a drive-by shooting, finding the murderers isn’t enough; he decides to wipe out every single criminal in the city. His former protégé (Craig Sheffer) thinks that’s extreme, even for a former special-ops guy, and sets out to stop him. Michael Winnick wrote and directed. DARK HORSE Take that, sport of kings! One day, a mild-mannered Welsh bartender decided she wanted to breed a racehorse. She persuaded a group of locals to invest in the foal, which they named Dream Alliance. And then the horse started to win, giving Louise Osmond’s film a triumph-of-the-underdog theme. It won a documentary audience award at Sundance. DHEEPAN It was the surprise Palme d’Or winner at Cannes last year. Directed by Jacques Audiard (“Rust and Bone”), this drama begins in Sri Lanka during the civil war there and moves to a suburban Paris housing project that could be just as dangerous. The title character — a Tamil fighter who acquires a fake family and a fake history to help his immigration prospects in France — is played by Antonythasan Jesuthasan, who was in real life a child Tamil soldier. ELSTREE 1976 Yes, Darth Vader spoke with James Earl Jones’s voice. But the man inside the costume, wielding the light saber, was David Prowse. He and Jeremy Bulloch (Boba Fett) are among the unsung “Star Wars” actors who talk in Jon Spira’s documentary about how the experience has affected their lives. The title refers to Elstree Studios in England. THE IDOL From Israel, the story of Mohammed Assaf, the young singer who won the “Arab Idol” competition in 2013. Born in Libya to Palestinian parents, Mr. Assaf grew up in Gaza, where he drove a taxi and sang at weddings. Variety said the film “kicks the drama into high gear” when Mohammed’s journey to the TV auditions in Cairo proves dangerous. Tawfeek Barhom stars. Hany Abu-Assad directed. MAD TIGER Fans of Peelander-Z know it as a New York-based Japanese action-comic punk band whose members adopt crayon-color names. In this music documentary by Jonathan Yi and Michael Haertlein, Red (Kotaro Tsukada) decides to leave the group, and Yellow (Kengo Hioki) can’t even. Because they’re sort of the John and Paul of the band. MOTHERS AND DAUGHTERS Selma Blair is a New York photographer who takes pictures of moms and their grown daughters and begins to pay attention to real mother-daughter relationships. With Susan Sarandon, Sharon Stone and Courteney Cox. Directed by Paul Duddridge and Nigel Levy. THE OFFERING Now even demons are tech-savvy. Elizabeth Rice stars in this horror drama as an American reporter whose sister dies mysteriously in Singapore. Investigating with the help of her brother-in-law (Matthew Settle), she discovers other deaths there and begins to understand how evil ancient entities are operating these days. Kelvin Tong directed. RABIN IN HIS OWN WORDS From Israel, a documentary about Yitzhak Rabin, the prime minister who was assassinated in Tel Aviv in 1995. Two decades later, archival footage and letters allow him to tell his own story, with the help of the director Erez Laufer. THOSE PEOPLE A sophisticated gay love triangle on the Upper East Side of Manhattan. Charlie (Jonathan Gordon), living in a world of Champagne and tuxedo nights, must choose between his older international-pianist lover and his self-destructive, hedonist best friend. Joey Kuhn, a first-timer, wrote and directed. TO LIFE (“À la Vie”) In 1960, three women who knew each other in their youth reunite at a beach in France but promise not to talk about the past. Because they were prisoners at Auschwitz. Julie Depardieu, Johanna ter Steege and Suzanne Clément star in this drama, directed by Jean-Jacques Zilbermann. May 11 A MONSTER WITH A THOUSAND HEADS The average contemporary insurance company, that is. From Mexico and the director Rodrigo Plá, a drama-thriller in which the villain is an indifferent health care insurer. Jana Raluy stars as a woman fighting desperately to get care approved for her terminally ill husband. The battle turns primal. May 13 CASH ONLY Malik Bader directed this thriller about a struggling Detroit landlord named Elvis who’s in debt to the Albanian mafia. His 9-year-old daughter is kidnapped as a result. And where is he going to come up with $25,000? Image Tom Hiddleston in “High-Rise.” Credit Magnolia Pictures HIGH-RISE You know how the apartments on the higher floors are always quieter, have better views and cost more? In the London apartment tower in this futuristic drama, the social stratification by floor is officially sanctioned. And extreme. Tom Hiddleston plays a doctor who has just moved into the upper level. Jeremy Irons is the architect. All the rich people are happy at their decadent parties until power failures start afflicting the lower floors, and class war — the real thing — breaks out. Ben Wheatley directed. HOW TO PLAN AN ORGY IN A SMALL TOWN Jewel Staite stars as a woman who was slut-shamed out of her small town and went on to become a big-city sex columnist. When she returns for her mother’s funeral, townspeople with various motivations ask for her guidance. Jeremy LaLonde directed. I AM WRATH John Travolta stars in this action thriller as a former black-ops agent who picks up his guns again after his wife is murdered and the police let the suspect walk. Christopher Meloni is his former associate, who helps him discover a major conspiracy. Chuck Russell directed. KILL ZONE 2 A prison is a front for organ trafficking in this Chinese martial-arts melodrama. Tony Jaa and Zhang Jin star. Pou-soi Cheang directed. LAST DAYS IN THE DESERT Ewan McGregor plays Jesus in this biblical drama. But he also plays the Devil, who has been tempting the holy man during his 40 days and nights of fasting and praying in this imagined chapter of Jesus’ life. Rodrigo Garcia wrote and directed. THE LOBSTER What’s the worst thing that could happen if you stay single? In Yorgos Lanthimos’s absurdist comedy, the unattached have 45 days to find true love; after that, they are turned into animals (but the animal of their choice, which is nice). Colin Farrell stars as an abandoned husband who isn’t having much luck on the dating scene. He joins a rebel faction and plans an escape; then along comes Rachel Weisz. LOVE & FRIENDSHIP Whit Stillman turns his attention from privileged white Manhattanites to privileged white 18th-century British folk in this Jane Austen adaptation (based on a little-known novella). Kate Beckinsale stars as a penniless young widow who escapes gossip by visiting relatives. As long as she’s there, she might as well look for a couple of husbands — one for her daughter, one for herself. With Chloë Sevigny. MONEY MONSTER George Clooney plays a TV star with a gun to his head in this thriller directed by Jodie Foster. In the middle of a live broadcast, the fast-talking host of a “Mad Money”-style show is taken hostage, along with his crew, including the producer, played by Julia Roberts. The gunman (Jack O’Connell), financially ruined by bad investment advice, wants explanations and justice. PATHS OF THE SOUL Taking a 1,200-mile walk on the road to Lhasa in Tibet would be challenging enough. But as part of the Buddhist “bowing pilgrimage,” participants stop every few steps and lie prostrate on the ground. A documentary directed by Zhang Yang. PELÉ: BIRTH OF A LEGEND He was 17 when he played in his first World Cup. (The team won.) This biopic about Pelé, still considered by many the greatest soccer player of all time, begins with his childhood in the slums of Brazil and moves on to glory. With Kevin de Paula and Vincent D’Onofrio. Directed by Jeff and Michael Zimbalist. SUNDOWN Two red-blooded high school senior boys travel to Puerto Vallarta, Mexico, for spring vacation and end up involved with a crime ring. (That beautiful young woman who spent the night stole a family-heirloom watch.) Fernando Lebrija directed this action-comedy-romance. SUNSET SONG From Terence Davies, a period drama set in rural Scotland in the early 20th century. Agyness Deyn stars as the young farm girl who works hard, falls in love, marries and loses entirely too much. THE TRUST Stone and Waters may have the most boring jobs in the Las Vegas Police Department (running the evidence room), but that doesn’t mean they’re above corruption. Nicolas Cage and Elijah Wood star in this heist thriller as partners who hatch a plan to break into a vault hidden inside a grocery-store freezer. And, yes, that’s Jerry Lewis as Mr. Cage’s father. Directed by Alex Brewer and Benjamin Brewer, newcomers and siblings. WHAT WE BECOME From Denmark, a horror film about the flu. One summer, the infection rate goes so high that a family has to seal itself off in the house while the bodies pile up outside. Bo Mikkelsen makes his feature writing and directing debut in what ends up as (oh, dear) a zombie movie. May 20 ALMOST HOLY One Pentecostal pastor in Ukraine has taken a novel approach to helping drug-addicted homeless children. Gennadiy Mohknenko kidnaps the children off the street and puts them in his rehab center. This documentary, from Steve Hoover, looks at the good work done by Mr. Mohknenko and the opposing view of him as a dangerous vigilante. THE ANGRY BIRDS MOVIE At last, thanks to this animated comedy based on a ridiculously popular video game, the back story of the long-running birds-versus-pigs conflict will be known. The voice cast includes Jason Sudeikis, Josh Gad, Maya Rudolph, Bill Hader and Peter Dinklage. ART BASTARD What makes Robert Cenedella furious? “Mediocrity deciding the fate of genius.” Mr. Cenedella is an outspoken New York City artist who early on declared himself the anti-Warhol. He has a white beard now, but this documentary, written and directed by Victor Kanefsky, is partly a portrait of a young troublemaker. BACK IN THE DAY A gritty drama about a young Brooklyn boxer coming-of-age in Bensonhurst in the late 1980s. Good plot development: This half-Italian, half-Puerto Rican teenager with an abusive alcoholic father finds a mentor. Bad plot development: The mentor is a mob boss. But he hooks the kid up with a trainer. William DeMeo (who wrote the screenplay) stars with Alec Baldwin, Michael Madsen, Annabella Sciorra and Danny Glover. BANG GANG: A MODERN LOVE STORY From France, the story of some teenagers from “nice families” who think they’re so sophisticated they can push their sexuality to the limit and handle a social life of repeated orgies. Eva Husson wrote, directed and plays a math teacher. IT’S SO EASY AND OTHER LIES Duff McKagan stars in his own story of musical fame with Guns N’ Roses, his struggles with substance abuse and his recovery. Christopher Duddy directed this documentary, based on Mr. McKagan’s best-selling memoir. KAILI BLUES From China, the fantasy-reality tale of a doctor on a journey to help his nephew. He finds a world where the past, present and future seem to coexist. This is the first film directed by Bi Gan. The Hollywood Reporter called it “a remarkable art-house debut.” MAGGIE’S PLAN In this romantic comedy from Rebecca Miller, a single New Yorker (Greta Gerwig) in her 30s is ready to have a baby. She loves a professor and struggling would-be novelist (Ethan Hawke), but he has a wife (Julianne Moore) and children. She has supportive best friends (Bill Hader and Maya Rudolph). MA MA Just after the doctor gives her bad news, she meets the love of her life. From Spain, a drama starring Penélope Cruz as a woman with breast cancer who falls in love with a married man (Luis Tosar) going through emotional loss of his own. Julio Medem wrote and directed. MANHATTAN NIGHT Adrien Brody stars in this noir-thriller as a tabloid writer who should (but doesn’t) leave murder investigations to the professionals. With Jennifer Beals as his wife, Yvonne Strahovski as the mysterious widow and Campbell Scott as her dead filmmaker husband. Brian DeCubellis directed, adapting it from a novel by Colin Harrison. Image From left, Carla Gallo, Ike Barinholtz, Zac Efron, Seth Rogen and Rose Byrne in “Neighbors 2: Sorority Rising.” Credit Chuck Zlotnick/Universal Pictures NEIGHBORS 2: SORORITY RISING Weren’t things bad enough for the Radners (Seth Rogen and Rose Byrne) and their baby when a fraternity moved in next door in the original movie? In this comedy sequel, a particularly raucous sorority takes over the neighboring home. Maybe the frat boys (led by Zac Efron) will help? With Chloë Grace Moretz as Kappa Nu’s finest. Nicholas Stoller directed. THE NICE GUYS Russell Crowe and Ryan Gosling in 1970s facial hair. Mr. Gosling is a nervous, struggling private eye and Mr. Crowe is a hired enforcer who switch from enemies to fellow investigators looking into the case of a missing young woman. An action comedy from Shane Black, who directed “Iron Man 3” and wrote the original “Lethal Weapon.” O.J.: MADE IN AMERICA Less than two months after the end of the FX series “The People v. O. J. Simpson,” Americans may be ready for another take on the 1990s trial. This documentary from Ezra Edelman looks at the big picture, including the impact of race, celebrity and the news media. O.K., it’s almost eight hours long and it will be on ESPN soon, but it’s running briefly in theaters too. THE OTHER SIDE This French-Italian documentary looks at American social problems. The setting is backwater Louisiana; the themes are poverty, racism, heroin and guns. When the film was at Cannes, Variety wrote that the director, Roberto Minervini, had managed to find “a serene beauty amid so much desperation and squalor.” SONG OF LAHORE The Sachai Jazz Ensemble in Pakistan made a YouTube video of Dave Brubeck’s “Take Five,” their sitar-intensive version. Wynton Marsalis saw it and invited them to play at Lincoln Center. This documentary, directed by Sharmeen Obaid-Chinoy and Andy Schocken, follows their journey. Image Anthony D. Weiner in a scene from the documentary “Weiner,” which followed his 2013 run for mayor of New York City. Credit IFC Films WEINER Two years after Anthony D. Weiner resigned from Congress because of explicit Twitter messages, he decided to run for mayor of New York City. That’s where the first-time documentary filmmakers Josh Kriegman and Elyse Steinberg came in, but the 2013 campaign they followed ended in anything but a glorious comeback. Mr. Weiner was undone this time by sexting revelations. The movie won the American documentary grand jury prize at Sundance. And A. O. Scott of The New York Times has praised it for “a queasy irresistibility.” WELCOME TO HAPPINESS In this comedy fantasy, a children’s-book author (Kyle Gallner) has a mysterious door in his closet that could change his life. Only certain people can enter, however, seemingly those who deserve much better than the raw deals they’ve gotten. With Nick Offerman and Olivia Thirlby. From a first-time writer and director, Oliver Thompson. May 25 UNLOCKING THE CAGE The documentary filmmakers Chris Hegedus and D. A. Pennebaker focus on Steven Wise, an animal rights lawyer, and the Nonhuman Rights Project. The group’s goal is to change the legal status of its chimpanzee plaintiffs from “things” with no rights to “persons” with legal protections. Whales, dolphins and elephants could be protected from abuse, too. May 27 ALICE THROUGH THE LOOKING GLASS The Mad Hatter hasn’t been himself lately, so a grown-up Alice goes time-traveling in Underland to help him. With Mia Wasikowska (as Alice), Johnny Depp (as the Hatter) and the voice of Alan Rickman, in one of his last roles, as the hookah-smoking caterpillar. James Bobin directed this sequel to Tim Burton’s 2010 film . AS I AM: THE LIFE AND TIMES OF DJ AM Adam Michael Goldstein, known as DJ AM, was 36 when he died in 2009 of an accidental drug overdose. The year before, he and the musician Travis Barker survived a Learjet crash that killed four others. This documentary from Kevin Kerslake looks back at his music, his drug use, his trauma and his relapse . CHEVALIER A comedy from Greece about six men on a yacht. During their fishing trip, they play a game involving measurements, blood tests and male nudity. Directed by Athina Rachel Tsangari, who got her movie-crew start on “Dazed and Confused.” HOLY HELL The Buddhafield cult’s first mistake was letting a recent film school graduate join. That man, Will Allen, turned his experience in this Los Angeles spiritual group (and its very dark side) into a documentary. When it was screened at Sundance, The Telegraph called it “fascinating and chilling.” JIA ZHANGKE: A GUY FROM FENYANG Walter Salles, the Brazilian director, created this documentary portrait. Mr. Jia, the Chinese director perhaps best known here for “A Touch of Sin,” his 2013 examination of modern China, visits his home province and reflects on change . THE ONES BELOW A fairy-tale-style thriller. One young London couple nervously expecting their first baby make friends with their new neighbors, a couple confidently expecting their first. But “Rosemary’s Baby” fans have to be wondering if the new couple are related to their favorite Satan worshipers, Minnie and Roman Castevet. David Farr directed. Image Samantha Montgomery in “Presenting Princess Shaw.” Credit Aubrey Edwards/Magnolia Pictures PRESENTING PRINCESS SHAW When Samantha Montgomery, a.k.a. Princess Shaw, wasn’t singing on her YouTube channel, she was caring for the elderly in New Orleans. Ophir Kutiel, a.k.a. Kutiman, was 7,000 miles away, a composer and video artist in Israel. The two made music together. A documentary directed by Ido Haar. Image Jennifer Lawrence and Evan Peters in “X-Men: Apocalypse.” Credit Alan Markfield/20th Century Fox X-MEN: APOCALYPSE That’s a character name, not the end of the world. Well, maybe both. Apocalypse was the first mutant, the most powerful. He’s immortal, and he’d been asleep for a few thousand years, until now. Apocalypse doesn’t like the world he wakes up to, so he decides to destroy it and start over. He will meet opposition. With Michael Fassbender, James McAvoy, Jennifer Lawrence and Olivia Munn. Oscar Isaac plays Apocalypse. Bryan Singer directed. June June 3 Summer Movies Preview: 10 Trailers for June Popstars, orcs and a wiener-dog are coming to the big screen this month. June 2, 2016 APPROACHING THE UNKNOWN Mark Strong stars in this sci-fi thriller as an astronaut on a solo one-way mission to Mars. There are some problems with stress. With Sanaa Lathan and Charles Baker. Mark Elijah Rosenberg is the first-time writer and director. THE FITS ACincinnati tomboy (Royalty Hightower), who boxes at the gym with her big brother, decides she’d rather join the dance team. She goes all out to fit in, but the game changes when there’s an epidemic of violent fainting-writhing spells. Anna Rose Holmer directed. THE GOD CELLS: FETAL STEM CELLS CONTROVERSY Eric Merola’s documentary follows Americans who have gone abroad for stem-cell therapy and examines the roadblocks that keep it from being approved here. HONEYGLUE The doctor tells Morgan, who is in her 20s, that she has three months to live. She’s determined not to spend those months in her old, boring, sheltered, cautious way. Luckily she meets a handsome-pretty gender-bending artist. Adriana Mather and Zach Villa star as the young lovers. James Bird wrote and directed this romantic drama. Image Emilia Clarke and Sam Claflin in the romantic drama “Me Before You.” Credit Alex Bailey/Warner Bros. and MGM ME BEFORE YOU “Game of Thrones” fans may not recognize their beloved Khaleesi Daenerys Targaryen as a brunette, but that is Emilia Clarke starring in this romantic drama. Sam Claflin is the handsome young man paralyzed by a motorcycle accident and pretty much done with life; Ms. Clarke takes a job caring for him. Thea Sharrock directed. POPSTAR: NEVER STOP NEVER STOPPING Andy Samberg is Conner4Real, an arrogant pop-rap star surrounded by sycophants. And then his career falls apart. Mr. Samberg stars with Akiva Schaffer and Jorma Taccone (the guys of the band the Lonely Island) in this music-biz comedy, which they also wrote and which Mr. Schaffer and Mr. Taccone directed. The cast includes Sarah Silverman as Conner’s publicist, Bill Hader as his roadie and Joan Cusack as his oddly proud mom. THE PRESIDENT He had a good run as an iron-fisted dictator, but now that’s over. The rest of his family escaped right after the coup, but the president and his little grandson are left behind. To try to reach safety, they disguise themselves as street musicians and actually talk to some of the “little people” whose lives the president made miserable. From Mohsen Makhmalbaf, an exiled Iranian director living in London. Image A scene from “Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles: Out of the Shadows.” Credit Lula Carvalho/Paramount TEENAGE MUTANT NINJA TURTLES 2: OUT OF THE SHADOWS Raphael says it best: He and his fellow title characters are “just four brothers who hate bullies and love this city!” In this sequel, directed by Dave Green, the superheroes return, as do Megan Fox as their reporter friend and Will Arnett as her camera guy. Fred Armisen is the voice of the supervillain Krang. THE THOUGHTS THAT ONCE WE HAD Thom Anderson makes essay films, and this essay is on 20th-century cinema, based on the writings of the French philosopher Gilles Deleuze. The story is told entirely in film clips. TIME TO CHOOSE A documentary about how bad climate change is, what the people working on the problem are up to and how much we can do with solutions that already exist. Directed by Charles Ferguson, who won a documentary Oscar for “Inside Job” (2010), about the financial meltdown. Narrated by Oscar Isaac. URGE Young people on an island vacation meet a suspicious nightclub owner (Pierce Brosnan), who introduces them to a new designer drug. Bad drug. Justin Chatwin, Ashley Greene and Bar Paly star in this thriller from a first-time director, Aaron Kaufman. THE WITNESS Half a century ago, Kitty Genovese was murdered on a Queens street while dozens of witnesses in nearby apartments did nothing. At least that’s what everybody believed for decades. William Genovese, her brother, decided to investigate the story, which had made her death a symbol of urban apathy. James D. Solomon directed. June 8 FROM AFAR (“Desde Allá”) This urban drama from Venezuela won the top prize at the Venice Film Festival last year. Alfredo Castro plays a 50-year-old in Caracas who pays young men for their company (and masturbatory inspiration). Then he meets a teenage gang leader (Luis Silva), and the drama becomes a romance. Written and directed by Lorenzo Vigas. June 9 ’TIL MADNESS DO US PART From China and the director Wang Bing, a documentary made inside an isolated rural mental institution in Yunnan Province. Mr. Wang uses digital video and long takes to reflect the inmates’ daily lives. June 10 BLACKWAY So much for the peace and quiet of Pacific Northwest logging towns. In this one, a sociopathic ex-cop (Ray Liotta) has turned into a violent crime boss. And he takes a violent dislike to one woman (Julia Stiles), back in her hometown after her mother’s death. To stop the harassment, she joins forces with a retired logger (Anthony Hopkins) and a young introvert (Alexander Ludwig). Daniel Alfredson directed. CALL HER APPLEBROOG Ida Applebroog, the Bronx-born, MacArthur grant-winning feminist artist, and her work — paintings, drawings and sculptures that often comment on gender and sexuality — are the subjects of this documentary. Ms. Applebroog is 86 now. The director, the New York downtown filmmakerBeth B, is her daughter . CAREFUL WHAT YOU WISH FOR Shades of Mrs. Robinson! Nick Jonas stars in this thriller as a college-bound boy having a summer affair with the wife (Isabel Lucas) of his investment-banker neighbor (Dermot Mulroney). All in a pretty vacation community for the wealthy. Elizabeth Allen directed . THE CONJURING 2 Vera Farmiga and Patrick Wilson return as the real-life paranormal investigators Lorraine and Ed Warren in this sequel. The couple’s newest challenge is a single mother living in North London with her four children and a house full of unfriendly spirits. From James Wan, who directed the original. DE PALMA It should surprise nobody that this documentary about the iconoclastic director Brian De Palma is rated R. So were most of his best-known films (“Carrie,” “Scarface,” “Blow Out,” “The Untouchables”), although “Dressed to Kill” was almost an X. The notable next-generation directors are the indie-acclaimed Noah Baumbach and Jake Paltrow. DIARY OF A CHAMBERMAID Oh, those bourgeoisie in turn-of-the-century Normandy! The man of the house is a lecher, the cook is pregnant by him (again), and the new maid is determined to avoid that fate. From France and Benoît Jacquot, the fourth film adaptation of Octave Mirbeau’s 1900 novel about control, repression, compulsion and, as the director has said, “a woman who has only her body to free herself.” GENIUS Yes, New Yorkers, there was a time (the 1920s and ’30s) when a book editor could be a superstar. His name was Maxwell Perkins, and everyone called him Max. The acclaimed theater director Michael Grandage makes his feature-film debut with this period drama starring Colin Firth as Perkins, Jude Law as Thomas Wolfe, Guy Pearce as F. Scott Fitzgerald, Dominic West as Ernest Hemingway and even a couple of women — Nicole Kidman as Wolfe’s love interest and Laura Linney as Perkins’s wife. KING JACK Poor, miserable 15-year-old Jack. He lives in a small town, is tortured by a bully, has to go to summer school and now is stuck watching his little cousin for a whole weekend. But in this coming-of-age story, written and directed by Felix Thompson, he stands a good chance of overcoming his unfortunate beginnings. With Charlie Plummer as Jack. THE MUSIC OF STRANGERS: YO-YO MA AND THE SILK ROAD ENSEMBLE A documentary about Mr. Ma’s ensemble, which exists to celebrate music’s ability to transcend culture and geography. Morgan Neville (“20 Feet From Stardom”) directed. Image Woody Harrelson in “Now You See Me 2.” Credit Jay Maidment NOW YOU SEE ME: 2 In this sequel to the Las Vegas heist flick, the illusionists’ prize involves computer code. The cast includes Morgan Freeman, Dave Franco, Jesse Eisenberg, Mark Ruffalo, Dave Franco, Woody Harrelson, Daniel Radcliffe (as a tech prodigy) and Lizzy Caplan. Jon M. Chu directed. THERAPY FOR A VAMPIRE (“Der Vampir auf der Couch”) From Austria and Switzerland, a comedy about monsters, marriage and mistaken identity. The immortal Count von Kozsnom is bored with his wife after 500 years together. Luckily, this is Vienna in 1930, and the count is able to schedule some nighttime sessions with that nice Dr. Freud. David Ruehm directed. TIKKUN From Israel, a dark comedy about an ultra-Orthodox young scholar who develops a strong interest in earthly delights after a near-death experience (or was it actual death?). Written and directed by Avishai Sivan. When the feature was at New Directors/New Films, A. O. Scott called it “haunting, creepily funny” and “a feverish satire.” Image Toby Kebbell, left, as a warrior with mighty incisors, and Robert Kazinsky in “Warcraft.” Credit Legendary Pictures, Universal Pictures and ILM WARCRAFT The aliens from Orc (who are huge and have tusks) are invading, determined to destroy peaceful Azeroth and colonize it. Fighting them involves lots of aerial combat and big-shouldered armor. The film, based on the video game, stars Travis Fimmel, Paula Patton and Ben Foster. Duncan Jones directed. June 17 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE Dwayne Johnson plays the former fat kid who was bullied in high school and is now a big, tough C.I.A. dude. Kevin Hart was the high school hero, now an unhappy accountant. But his old friend says he needs his skills to “save the free world.” Shootouts follow. From Rawson Marshall Thurber, who directed “We’re the Millers.” COSMOS The final film of the art-house provocateur Andrzej Zulawski, who died in February in Poland. A young man goes on holiday after flunking out of law school. He becomes obsessed with a guesthouse owner’s daughter and begins to see very creepy omens, like a hanged sparrow. FINDING DORY Of course Ellen DeGeneres is back as the voice of Dory, the good-hearted blue tang fish with chronic short-term-memory problems, in this long-awaited animated sequel to “Finding Nemo.” Now Marlin (Albert Brooks) is going to help her deal with a long-term mystery: where she came from. New additions to the voice cast include Diane Keaton and Eugene Levy (as Dory’s parents), Ed O’Neill and Idris Elba. THE LAST KING In the year 1206, Norway is embroiled in civil war and the king is on his deathbed. But in secrecy, his only son is born, and two pro-monarchy soldiers are assigned to take the infant to safety. A blizzard complicates their job. Nils Gaup directed. MADE IN VENICE California, not Italy. A documentary about the skateboarding scene, its history and its avid beach-town devotees. Directed by Jonathan Penson. MY LOVE, DON’T CROSS THAT RIVER From South Korea, a documentary about a husband and wife nearing the end of their lives. Byung-Man Jo and Kyae-Yual Kang, who met when she was 14, pick flowers, have a snowball fight, eat corn on the cob by the fire, mourn the loss of a pet dog and ponder their remaining time. Jin Mo-young directed. NO STRANGER THAN LOVE Many of us, on a first date, have wished that a hole would open up in the floor and swallow the other person. That actually happens to Alison Brie’s character in this romantic comedy directed by Nick Wernham. With Justin Chatwin and Colin Hanks. TICKLED It turns out that people with a fetish for being tickled are — what else? — supersensitive. From New Zealand, David Farrier and Dylan Reeve’s documentary was meant to be lighthearted but turned into a nightmare, for the filmmakers, of intimidation and threatened lawsuits. June 22 NUTS! Dr. John Romulus Brinkley should have lived to know about Viagra. In the early 20th century, Dr. Brinkley (his medical degree was from a diploma mill) became very wealthy by promising to restore men’s virility with goat–gland testicle surgery. But his success didn’t last. This is his story, more or less, the filmmakers say. Penny Lane (“Our Nixon”) directed. June 24 ACCIDENTAL EXORCIST Career choices are always tricky. Daniel Falicki directed and stars in this horror thriller as a man who learns he’s brilliant at exorcising demons. Unfortunately, while he’s wildly successful at it, it’s destroying his life. EAT THAT QUESTION: FRANK ZAPPA IN HIS OWN WORDS An all-archival-footage documentary, including rare television interviews, starring the prolific, unclassifiable Zappa, who died in 1993. Directed by Thorsten Schütte. Image Mahershala Ali, left, and Matthew McConaughey in “Free State of Jones.” Credit Murray Close FREE STATE OF JONES Matthew McConaughey stars in a Civil War-era drama (and not the summer’s only one). His real-life character: Newton Knight, a Mississippi farmer turned Confederate Army deserter who led his own armed rebellion, announcing that Jones County had seceded from the secession. Gugu Mbatha-Raw and Keri Russell also star. Gary Ross directed. HUNT FOR THE WILDERPEOPLE Sam Neill stars in this road-comedy adventure as a grumpy New Zealander who finds himself on the run in the bush with his foster nephew (Julian Dennison), a tough city kid. Before you know it, there’s a manhunt. Taika Waititi (who made “What We Do in the Shadows” with Jemaine Clement) wrote and directed. INDEPENDENCE DAY: RESURGENCE The aliens are back, their technology has advanced even more, and they still just want us to die. Much of the cast is back from the original “Independence Day,” too, including Bill Pullman, Jeff Goldblum, Judd Hirsch, Brent Spiner and Vivica A. Fox. Jessie Usher plays the son of Will Smith’s absent character, and Sela Ward is the new president. Roland Emmerich directed again. THE INNOCENTS In 1945, a young French doctor goes to Warsaw to help survivors of the Nazi camps. But in this French-Polish drama, the doctor also finds a convent with numerous pregnant nuns, rape victims of Soviet soldiers, and she has to help. Anne Fontaine directed. THE KIND WORDS From Israel, a comedy drama about three siblings on a journey to learn about the skeletons in their dead mother’s closet. The search takes them to France. Written and directed by Shemi Zarhin. LES COWBOYS Something of an hommage to John Ford’s “The Searchers,” this French drama is a western in its own way. The 16-year-old daughter of Alain (François Damiens), a fan of the American Old West, has run away to start a new life with her Muslim boyfriend. Alain sets out on a yearslong quest to find her, finally passing the baton to his son (Finnegan Oldfield). The screenwriter Thomas Bidegain makes his directing debut. THE NEON DEMON They say modeling is a tough business, but most newcomers don’t have as much trouble as Jesse (Elle Fanning) when she moves to Los Angeles to get her start. There she finds women who will do anything (horror-movie anything) to take her youth and beauty. With Christina Hendricks, Keanu Reeves, Jena Malone and Bella Heathcote. Nicolas Winding Refn wrote and directed. THE PHENOM Hopper Gibson may be the best movie rookie-baseball-pitcher name since Nuke LaLoosh (“Bull Durham”). Hopper (Johnny Simmons) has problems, is sent back to the minor leagues, starts seeing an unusual sports therapist (Paul Giamatti) and tries to deal with his pushy father (Ethan Hawke). Noah Buschel wrote and directed this drama. RIGHT NOW, WRONG THEN A little bit “Stardust Memories,” a little bit “Sliding Doors.” From South Korea, a comedy of romantic manners in which a director gets to town a day early for a festival, meets and spends the day with a young painter and falls in love. Then time shifts, and it happens again, but differently. Hong Sang-soo directed. SEPTEMBERS OF SHIRAZ The title may be misleading to oenophiles, but Shiraz is also a large city in southern Iran that for a long time had a sizable Jewish population. In this thriller, set shortly after the 1979 revolution, members of an affluent Jewish family are targeted by the country’s new Islamic leaders and may have to abandon the life they love. Salma Hayek Pinault, Adrien Brody and Shohreh Aghdashloo star. Directed by Wayne Blair. THE SHALLOWS Blake Lively stars in this thriller as a surfer who is attacked by a great white shark and then stranded, just 200 yards from safety. Jaume Collet-Serra directed. SWISS ARMY MAN In “Cast Away,” Tom Hanks made friends with a volleyball. In this fantasy adventure, Paul Dano’s character, similarly stranded on a desert island, bonds with a corpse (Daniel Radcliffe) that washes ashore. And they set out to try to find home. Daniel Scheinert and Daniel Kwan are the writers and first-time directors. Image Keaton Nigel Cooke with the title character in Todd Solondz’s “Wiener-Dog.” Credit Linda Callerus/Amazon Studios and IFC Films WIENER-DOG From Todd Solondz, his specialty: the dark comedy of regret and despair. The human cast includes Ellen Burstyn, Danny DeVito and Kieran Culkin. And little Dawn Weiner from Mr. Solondz’s “Welcome to the Dollhouse” has grown up to be Greta Gerwig. But the heroine is Wiener-Dog, a real dachshund, who travels from owner to owner, spreading joy. And these people need it. July July 1 THE BFG Steven Spielberg returns to fantasy-adventure. His source is a Roald Dahl children’s book, and his star is Mark Rylance (the recent Oscar winner for “Bridge of Spies”). Mr. Rylance plays the title character, the 24-foot-tall Big Friendly Giant, whose job is to send children sweet dreams. Ruby Barnhill is his new 10-year-old friend. With Penelope Wilton as the queen of England, whose help they need to fight the bad giants. THE LEGEND OF TARZAN Alexander Skarsgard, Tarzan. Margot Robbie, Jane. David Yates, who did the last four “Harry Potter” movies, director. MICROBE AND GASOLINE From France and the director Michel Gondry (“Eternal Sunshine of the Spotless Mind”), a summer-vacation coming-of-age comedy. Ange Dargent and Théophile Baquet play adolescent boys, both considered different, who take a road trip in a car they built themselves, with a house on top. OUR KIND OF TRAITOR From a John le Carré novel, a cautionary tale about making friends on vacation. Ewan McGregor and Naomie Harris, as a British couple in Marrakesh, Morocco, meet a charming Russian (Stellan Skarsgard) who turns out to be a major money launderer. And he asks for their help. Susanna White directed. THE PURGE: ELECTION YEAR James DeMonaco, who wrote and directed the first two “Purge” movies, is back. So is Leo Barnes (Frank Grillo), from the second movie, with a new job: head of security for a United States senator (Elizabeth Mitchell) with presidential aspirations. And they both find themselves on the streets of Washington on that one night a year that murder is legal. July 6 UNDER THE SUN Vitaly Mansky goes to North Korea to follow the making of a supposed documentary about a patriotic little girl, her family and her amazingly perfect life. The Hollywood Reporter called it “a real-life version of ‘The Truman Show.’” July 8 CAPTAIN FANTASTIC Not a superhero movie. Viggo Mortensen stars in this drama as a father of six living in an isolated natural paradise in the Pacific Northwest. But when tragedy strikes the family, the members have to join the real world, and he has to rethink what being a good parent is about. Matt Ross wrote and directed. CELL They tried to tell us cellphones would fry our brains. In this horror drama based on Stephen King’s novel, something called “the pulse” turns hordes of phone users zombie-homicidal. John Cusack and Samuel L. Jackson star as unaffected Luddites trying to get through the insanity. Tod Williams directed. FATHERS AND DAUGHTERS A drama that suggests we all turn into our parents. Russell Crowe plays a widowed writer struggling with a mental breakdown and fatherhood. Decades later, his daughter (Amanda Seyfried) goes through her own version of the same things. Gabriele Muccino directed this drama, which also features Aaron Paul, Quvenzhané Wallis and Jane Fonda. LIFE, ANIMATED Thank you, Walt Disney. Owen Suskind was 3 when he began to lose his language skills. Over the years, though, his parents found a way to help their autistic son communicate, teach him about complex social issues and reconnect him with the world: repeated viewings of animated Disney classics like “The Lion King” and “The Little Mermaid.” From Roger Ross Williams, who won the documentary direction award for this at Sundance. MEN GO TO BATTLE David Maloney and Tim Morton play brothers trying to keep their Kentucky farm going in 1861. When they quarrel and go their separate ways, neither knows how he will survive, but the Civil War is sure to play a part. Zachary Treitz directed. MIKE AND DAVE NEED WEDDING DATES A comedy about the dangers of taking a total stranger to your sister’s festive Hawaiian wedding. Zac Efron and Adam Devine play brothers in need of plus-twos who go on a dating site and get more than they bargained for (Anna Kendrick and Aubrey Plaza). Jake Szymanski directed. NORMAN LEAR: JUST ANOTHER VERSION OF YOU He revolutionized television comedy in the 1970s, especially broadening what could be talked about (race, sex, abortion) in prime time. This documentary begins with Mr. Lear’s Connecticut childhood and follows him to Hollywood, “All in the Family” and decades of success. Heidi Ewing and Rachel Grady directed. Image From left, Haruka Ayase, Suzu Hirose, Kaho and Masami Nagasawa in “Our Little Sister.” Credit Mikiya Takimoto/Sony Pictures Classics OUR LITTLE SISTER Three female siblings in their 20s attend their estranged father’s funeral and meet their half-sister, a demure teenager. Come live with us, they say. With four young women sharing a big house in a seaside town, the seasons pass, emotional anguish and emotional support come and go, and family is defined. From Japan, based on a graphic novel. Hirokazu Kore-eda adapted and directed. Image A scene from “The Secret Life of Pets.” Credit Illumination Entertainment and Universal Pictures THE SECRET LIFE OF PETS Just as New Yorkers have always suspected, when they leave their apartments, their dogs, cats and other companion animals lead their own lives. In this animated comedy, Max the terrier (the voice of Louis C. K.) runs into real problems when his human mom brings home Duke (Eric Stonestreet), a huge brute from the pound. The voice cast also includes Kevin Hart, Steve Coogan and Ellie Kemper. ZERO DAYS Cyberwar is real. Alex Gibney’s documentary tells the story of Stuxnet, a piece of computer malware used against Iran and its nuclear program, and the Pandora’s box it may have opened. July 13 DON’T BLINK: ROBERT FRANK A Swiss-born photographer, Mr. Frank, now 91, made his name in the 1950s with “The Americans,” which looked at poverty and racism here. A documentary from Laura Israel. July 15 Image Jesse Eisenberg and Kristen Stewart in “Café Society.” Credit Sabrina Lantos/Gravier Productions CAFÉ SOCIETY Woody Allen has really come home, with this romantic comedy, his second movie in a row shot in the United States. Set in New York and Hollywood in the 1930s, it stars Jesse Eisenberg as a film-industry aspirant who gets caught up in the era’s frantic social scene. With Blake Lively, Kristen Stewart and Steve Carell. The film is the opening-night feature at Cannes in May. EQUALS A sci-fi romance starring Kristen Stewart and Nicholas Hoult. The story is set in a crime-free, violence-free society in the future, which is possible because human emotions have been eliminated. But somebody must have missed a chromosome, because two young co-workers find themselves attracted to each other, and that’s not allowed. Drake Doremus directed. GLEASON Steve Gleason of the New Orleans Saints was 34 when he received a diagnosis of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), or Lou Gehrig’s disease. He began keeping video journals for his son, who was born a few months later. This documentary based on them, written and directed by Clay Tweel, won an Audience Award at South by Southwest. Mr. Gleason turned 39 in March. GHOSTBUSTERS The horror-comedy remake that many movie fans have been waiting for — and many others are just waiting to hate. This time, the peopleyou’re gonna call to defeat ghosts and other paranormal phenomena are all women. And heaven help the ghosts, the team is made up of Melissa McCarthy, Kristen Wiig, Kate McKinnon and Leslie Jones. There will be slime. Paul Feig, who directed “Bridesmaids,” did this one. THE INFILTRATOR The ever-versatile Bryan Cranston stars as an undercover customs agent posing as a money-laundering businessman to get inside Pablo Escobar’s drug empire. John Leguizamo plays Mr. Cranston’s partner, Diane Kruger is an agent posing as his fiancée, and Benjamin Bratt is a drug-cartel leader. Brad Furman directed. LITTLE MEN No connection with the Louisa May Alcott classic. Greg Kinnear and Jennifer Ehle star as a Manhattan couple who move to Brooklyn. Their 13-year-old son makes a new best pal, but the boys’ friendship may not survive their parents’ battles over gentrification. A family drama directed by Ira Sachs (“Love Is Strange”). MY KING (“Mon Roi”) Sometimes a woman needs time to think things over. In this drama from France, Tony (Emmanuelle Bercot) finds that time when a serious skiing accident means long-term physical rehab. Ms. Bercot won best actress at Cannes last year for this performance (tied with Rooney Mara for “Carol”). Vincent Cassel plays Georgio, her suffocating, destructive lover. Maïwenn directed. OUTLAWS AND ANGELS A western-thriller hybrid starring Chad Michael Murray, Teri Polo, Luke Wilson and Francesca Eastwood. For the Tilden family, a home invasion turns into an even more dangerous game. J T Mollner wrote and directed. PHANTOM BOY From France, an animated adventure about an out-of-body experience in New York. Leo can transform himself into a phantom and explore Manhattan while leaving his physical self behind in his hospital bed. He and a police officer in a wheelchair team up to fight a master criminal. SUMMERTIME Also from France, a romantic drama about a farmer’s daughter who moves to Paris in 1971, as the feminist movement is building there, and has an affair that defines her sexuality and changes her life. Cécile de France and Izïa Higelin star. Catherine Corsini directed. TONY ROBBINS: I AM NOT YOUR GURU They want to change their lives. They go to Boca Raton, Fla., for six days to attend a seminar that Mr. Robbins, a life strategist, calls Date With Destiny. For this documentary, he allowed the filmmaker Joe Berlinger and his camera crew inside. UNDRAFTED A comedy-drama about seeing your dreams crushed and going on. Aaron Tveit plays a college baseball star who is passed over by the Major League draft and has to find something else to live for. With Joseph Mazzello, Chace Crawford and James Belushi. Mr. Mazzello directed and wrote the screenplay, based on his brother’s life. July 22 Image Joanna Lumley and Jennifer Saunders in “Absolutely Fabulous.” Credit David Appleby/20th Century Fox ABSOLUTELY FABULOUS: THE MOVIE Surely Patsy and Edie won’t let a little thing like destitution cramp their style. Edina Monsoon (Jennifer Saunders, who also wrote the screenplay) and Patsy Stone (Joanna Lumley), the comically hedonistic limousine Londoners of 1990s TV, are finally on the big screen, and they’re in trouble. After being blamed for an unfortunate incident at a P.R. party, they run away (penniless) to the French Riviera. Mandie Fletcher directed. ICE AGE: COLLISION COURSE Little Scrat, the saber-toothed squirrel, loves acorns too much. Here, in the fifth film in this animated series, his obsession leads him to a flying saucer and a wild ride — which accidentally results in a meteorite heading straight for Earth. The animals set out to save themselves. With a voice cast including Ray Romano, Denis Leary, John Leguizamo, Queen Latifah and Wanda Sykes. INTO THE FOREST In the near future, the world as we know it ends. Two sisters (Ellen Page and Evan Rachel Wood), who live in a remote home surrounded by a beautiful forest, never know why, because all communications systems are gone. But in this drama, they are determined to survive, somehow. The director, Patricia Rozema, is a long way from “Mansfield Park.” LIGHTS OUT A woman was right to be afraid of the dark when she was a child; now her little brother is going through the same thing, and it’s serious. Maria Bello, Teresa Palmer and Gabriel Bateman star in a horror story about a creature that attacks only when the lights have been turned off. David F. Sandberg directed. QUITTERS A high school boy with nowhere to go. Ben Konigsberg plays a teenager whose mother has gone away to rehab. He can’t get along with his father, so he tries moving in with his girlfriend’s much more normal family, but that presents its own problems. With Mira Sorvino, Kieran Culkin and Kara Hayward. A comic drama directed by Noah Pritzker. Image From left, Simon Pegg, Sofia Boutella and Chris Pine in “Star Trek Beyond.” Credit Kimberley French/Paramount STAR TREK BEYOND No offense to Capt. Jean-Luc Picard and crew, but this is the true new generation: Chris Pine, Zachary Quinto, Simon Pegg, Karl Urban, Zoe Saldana, Anton Yelchin and John Cho, all back from the 2009 “Star Trek” and 2013 “Star Trek Into Darkness.” This film’s visiting stars are Shohreh Aghdashloo, as head commander of the Federation, and Idris Elba. Justin Lin directed. July 27 HIERONYMUS BOSCH: TOUCHED BY THE DEVIL Bosch died 500 years ago (1516), and you’ll have to go to Madrid to see his masterpiece, “The Garden of Earthly Delights,” in the Prado. But this documentary from the Netherlands, directed by Pieter van Huystee, takes a look at the artist’s work, with its bizarre imagery and minute detail, and worries about fakes. July 29 AUTHOR: THE J.T. LEROY STORY He was the drug-addicted, gender-fluid son of a West Virginia prostitute. He was quite a literary celebrity at the millennium’s turn. The truth came out in 2005: Leroy was just a persona, invented by a Brooklyn woman, Laura Albert. Jeff Feuerzeig directed this documentary. Image From left, Mila Kunis, Kristen Bell and Kathryn Hahn in “Bad Moms.” Credit Michele K. Short BAD MOMS Sometimes a woman just can’t take one more bake sale. Amy (Mila Kunis) is so tired of overachieving with her husband, children and career that she breaks down and leads pals in a binge of self-indulgence. The cast also includes Christina Applegate (as the epitome of P.T.A. perfection), Kristen Bell, Kathryn Hahn and Jada Pinkett Smith. Jon Lucas and Scott Moore of “The Hangover” wrote and directed. EQUITY Finally, a Wall Street firm run by women. Anna Gunn plays an ambitious character trying to get ahead there, but this organization turns out to be just as corrupt as all the rest — uh, some others. James Purefoy plays her love interest. Meera Menon directed this financial-intrigue drama. INDIGNATION Ohio, 1951: A nice Jewish boy from the East Coast enrolls at a small liberal arts college. Clearly, this is Philip Roth country (based on his 2008 novel). Logan Lerman plays the brilliant scholarship student from Newark, trying to avoid the Korean War. Sarah Gadon is the blond Midwesterner he falls for. Tracy Letts is the antagonistic dean. James Schamus adapted, wrote and directed. JASON BOURNE “I know who I am,” the title character (Matt Damon) announces. “I remember everything.” That’s quite a development in this, the fifth action thriller about Bourne, the framed C.I.A. agent and amnesiac assassin created by Robert Ludlum. Alicia Vikander, the newly minted Oscar winner, is Mr. Damon’s co-star, along with Julia Stiles (returning as Nicky) and Tommy Lee Jones. Paul Greengrass, who directed Mr. Damon as Bourne in the “Supremacy” and “Ultimatum” films, also returns. August Aug. 5 THE FOUNDER Michael Keaton plays Ray Kroc, a man who knew what he wanted (the McDonald brothers’ little hamburger business) and got it. Before that, he was selling milkshake machines. John Lee Hancock directed. FRONT COVER In this romance set in New York, a gay fashion stylist hates his Asian heritage and does everything he can to ignore it. Until he develops an unexpected friendship with a visiting Chinese actor and is forced to reconsider. Starring Jake Choi and James Chen. Ray Yeung wrote and directed. NEITHER HEAVEN NOR EARTH An eerie war drama from France set in Afghanistan. When it was at New Directors/New Films, A. O. Scott, writing in The Times, called the film an “effectively spooky” ghost story. Jérémie Renier plays an army captain whose soldiers, on a surveillance mission in a remote valley, mysteriously begin to disappear, one by one. Clément Cogitore makes his directorial debut. NINE LIVES Kevin Spacey stars in this Barry Sonnenfeld comedy as a detestable billionaire who finds himself trapped in the body of the family cat, Mr. Fuzzypants. To become himself again, he has to make amends, starting with his family. With Jennifer Garner and Christopher Walken. SUICIDE SQUAD Supervillains, unite! Directed by David Ayer. Aug. 10 AN ART THAT NATURE MAKES: THE WORK OF ROSAMOND PURCELL Molly Bernstein directed this documentary about Ms. Purcell, a photographer and writer who uses unglamorous natural objects (bones, feathers, leaves) and old found objects in her photocollages. Aug. 12 Image Meryl Streep in the title role of “Florence Foster Jenkins” and Hugh Grant as her husband, St. Clair Bayfield. Credit Nick Wall/Paramount FLORENCE FOSTER JENKINS May Hollywood never run out of fascinating older women for Meryl Streep to embody! Here, she plays Jenkins (1868-1944), a truly terrible singer who imagined herself an opera star. Stephen Frears directed this frothy biopic, revealing the true answer to the question “How do you get to Carnegie Hall?” Have a rich husband. Hugh Grant plays that husband, and Simon Helberg (looking very different from Howard on “The Big Bang Theory”) is the understandably appalled pianist. THE HOLLARS John Krasinski directed and stars in this comic drama about a New York artist who has to return to his unsophisticated hometown and deal with everyone there while his mother has major surgery. He brings along his girlfriend, who’s eight months pregnant. With Anna Kendrick, Mary Elizabeth Winstead, Margo Martindale and Richard Jenkins. PETE’S DRAGON Not a remake of the 1977 family musical, but this family drama works with the same basic premise: A little boy with no family has a best friend, who happens to be a flying dragon. Bryce Dallas Howard is the park ranger who learns the story, Robert Redford is her father (who has seen it all), and Oakes Fegley is the boy. David Lowery directed. Image A scene from “Sausage Party.” Credit Columbia Pictures SAUSAGE PARTY The good news is that this is an animated film. And that it’s about supermarket products, including an actual wiener (the voice of Seth Rogen, who was one of the writers), searching for the meaning of their lives. The even better news, for protective parents, is that it’s rated R. The perishables (gulp) don’t like the answers they find (being chopped up, boiled and eaten, among other things), which may explain their incessant use of four-letter words.The voice cast also includes Jonah Hill, Kristen Wiig, Bill Hader and Michael Cera. SPECTRAL Who ya gonna call? Apparently, there is more than one answer to that question this summer (see “Ghostbusters,” July 15). In this action thriller, a special operations team battles supernatural forces in New York City. Emily Mortimer, James Badge Dale and Bruce Greenwood star. Nic Mathieu is the first-time director. Aug. 17 WHEN TWO WORLDS COLLIDE From Peru and Britain, a documentary about a David-and-Goliath battle over the Amazon rain forests. Alberto Pizango, a leader of the indigenous people in Peru, has been compared to Cesar Chavez. Heidi Brandenburg Sierralta and Mathew Orzel directed. Aug. 19 Image Jack Huston in the title role in the remake of “Ben-Hur.” Credit Philippe Antonello/MGM and Paramount BEN-HUR To many, it may be sacrilege to remake the 1959 Bible-era revenge epic that starred Charlton Heston in the title role, but at least moviegoers will get to see that famous chariot race in 3-D now. Jack Huston (grandson of John, son of Tony) plays Judah Ben-Hur, the Jewish nobleman betrayed into slavery. From Timur Bekmambetov (“Abraham Lincoln: Vampire Hunter”). Oh, look, there’s Morgan Freeman as Sheik Ilderim. CLOSET MONSTER A troubled teenage boy (Connor Jessup) who’s unsure about his sexuality is miserable in his narrow-minded small town, waiting impatiently to escape, in this coming-of-age drama with a touch of magic realism. The talking hamster he confides in has Isabella Rossellini’s voice. Stephen Dunn wrote and directed. DISORDER Matthias Schoenarts stars in this psychological drama as a French soldier with post-traumatic stress disorder and a new job handling security for a wealthy family. One night, when the woman of the house (Diane Kruger) and her child seem to be in imminent danger, the worst symptoms of his syndrome kick in. Alice Winocour directed. KICKBOXER VENGEANCE The title pretty much says it. When a California martial artist (Alain Moussi) learns that his brother was killed in a fight, he vows revenge. To prepare, he flies to Thailand to train with the best there is (a character played by Jean-Claude Van Damme). John Stockwell directed. KUBO AND THE TWO STRINGS An American animated adventure set in a mythical Japan. The plot involves a spirit from the past and an ancient vendetta. The voice cast includes Matthew McConaughey, Charlize Theron and Rooney Mara. Travis Knight directed. LO & BEHOLD: REVERIES OF THE CONNECTED WORLD In this documentary the director Werner Herzog turns his attention to the online world, how much it has transformed our lives already and just how far it may go. One man wonders aloud if our great-grandchildren will even want or need human interaction. THE PEOPLE VS. FRITZ BAUER From Germany, the story of the prosecutor who was largely responsible for the capture and trial of the Nazi war criminal Adolf Eichmann. Bauer (Burghart Klausner) worked with Israeli intelligence to find Eichmann, who was living in Argentina. Eichmann was brought to trial in Jerusalem in 1961 and executed the next year. Lars Kraume directed. THE SPACE BETWEEN US The first question in this adventure-romance is whether Mars has fast, reliable interplanetary Wi-Fi. When astronauts shuttle off to colonize the Red Planet, one neglects to mention that she’s pregnant, and she dies (in childbirth, on Mars) without revealing the father’s identity. This is the story of her son (Asa Butterfield, who starred in “Hugo”), his oddly secluded upbringing by the scientists, his online friendship with an Earth girl and the discovery that he can’t survive on Earth, although he’s human. Isn’t he? Peter Chelsom directed. A TALE OF LOVE AND DARKNESS Natalie Portman makes her directorial debut, and it’s a biopic, for which she also wrote the screenplay. The subject is Amos Oz (Amir Tessler), the Israeli novelist and professor, also known as an advocate of the two-state solution. Based on his memoir, the film looks at his birth in Jerusalem (when it was part of British-ruled Palestine), the early years of Israel and his beginnings as a writer. Ms. Portman, who was born in Israel, plays his mother. Image Miles Teller, left, and Jonah Hill in “War Dogs.” Credit Warner Bros. WAR DOGS Jonah Hill and Miles Teller star in a comic drama based on a Rolling Stone article about real events. They play young, inexperienced guys who win a $300 million Pentagon arms contract (because their bid was so unbelievably low) and are too stupid to know when they’re running guns through the Triangle of Death. Todd Phillips directed. Aug. 26 BLOOD FATHER Mel Gibson enters a new stage of his career: playing the old guy in action flicks, Here, Mr. Gibson is an ex-con trying to save the life of his daughter, who is running from a murderous drug cartel. With Erin Moriarty and Diego Luna. Jean-François Richet directed. DON’T BREATHE A thriller about three young friends who break into a blind man’s house and think they’ll get away with the perfect home-invasion burglary. Wrong. The cast includes Jane Levy, Dylan Minnette, Daniel Zovatto and Stephen Lang. Fede Alvarez (the rebooted “Evil Dead”) directed. EDGE OF WINTER Joel Kinnaman plays a recently divorced, unemployed father trying to bond with his sons on a day trip. But when they end up stranded in a cabin with a snowstorm approaching, the boys realize Dad may not be that stable. And there are guns in the house. Rob Connolly directed this drama. HANDS OF STONE Edgar Ramírez plays Roberto Durán, the Panamanian welterweight boxer who defeated Sugar Ray Leonard in 1980. Mr. Durán also became famous for knowing when to say “No mas.” Usher Raymond plays his opponent. A sports drama written and directed by Jonathan Jakubowicz. THE INTERVENTION Clea DuVall wrote, directed and appears in this comic drama about four couples on a weekend getaway that turns out to be a covertly arranged marriage intervention. Melanie Lynskey won a special jury prize at Sundance for her performance. With Cobie Smulders, Jason Ritter, Vincent Piazza and Natasha Lyonne. A MAN CALLED OVE From Sweden, a comedy about an odd-couple friendship. It begins when Parvaneh, who is pregnant, and her family move into a new neighborhood and she backs into Ove’s mailbox. The biggest curmudgeon on the block, Ove is a jobless widower who likes to think he runs the condo association and everybody’s lives. Directed by Hannes Holm. MAX ROSE Jerry Lewis plays a retired jazz musician who learns, just before his wife dies, that she may have cheated on him in the ’50s. So his challenge is to get through grief and of betrayal at the same time. With Kevin Pollak as his son, Kerry Bishé as his granddaughter, Claire Bloom as his wife and Dean Stockwell as the other man. Daniel Noah wrote and directed. MECHANIC: RESURRECTION Arthur Bishop may kill people for a living, but he gets really mad only when someone he loves is hurt. In the original 2011 action crime thriller, it was his mentor. In this sequel, directed by Dennis Gansel, Jason Statham is back as Bishop, and his true love has been kidnapped — just when he has three big assassination jobs on his calendar. With Jessica Alba, Tommy Lee Jones and Michelle Yeoh. SOUTHSIDE WITH YOU A summer day in Chicago, 1989: A young, male law-firm intern and a young, female lawyer go on their first date. It’s a daylong affair, including a museum, a movie (Spike Lee’s “Do the Right Thing”) and their first kiss. In real life, they married three years later and moved into the White House 17 years after that. Parker Sawyers plays Barack Obama, and Tika Sumpter is Michelle Robinson. Richard Tanne wrote and directed this romantic drama. Aug. 31 THE SEASONS IN QUINCY: FOUR PORTRAITS OF JOHN BERGER Call him a Renaissance man or a polymath. Mr. Berger, now 89, is a painter, art critic, novelist (his “G” won the Booker Prize), screenwriter, playwright and poet who escaped to the country decades ago, living in Quincy, an Alpine village in France. This four-part documentary about him has four directors: Colin MacCabe, Christopher Roth, Bartek Dziadosz and the best-known, Tilda Swinton, who also appears in the film. Sept. 2 Image Michael Fassbender and Alicia Vikander in “The Light Between Oceans.” Credit Davi Russo/DreamWorks THE LIGHT BETWEEN OCEANS Alicia Vikander and Michael Fassbender star as young marrieds in a drama set on a tiny Australian lighthouse island shortly after World War I. She desperately wants a child, and when one day a boat drifts ashore, with a dead man and an infant aboard, she has to believe it’s a sign from God. There will be consequences. Derek Cianfrance wrote and directed. Compiled with the assistance of Suzanne O’Connor. Compiled with the assistance of Suzanne O’Connor.  A version of this article appears in print on , on Page AR 34 of the New York edition with the headline: Basking in the Warmth of the Screen . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              