   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Briefing Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by El Salvador, Oprah Winfrey, Stephen K. Bannon: Your Evening Briefing By  Daniel Victor and David Scull Jan. 8, 2018 (Want to get this briefing by email? Here’s the sign-up .) Good evening. Here’s the latest. Image Credit Emily Berl for The New York Times 1. Nearly 200,000 people from El Salvador will have to leave the United States after living here for more than a decade , the Trump administration announced on Monday. Homeland Security officials said they were ending a humanitarian program that allowed the Salvadorans to live and work in the U.S. after a pair of earthquakes hit El Salvador in 2001. It represents one of the administration’s most consequential immigration policy reversals to date. “We had hope that if we worked hard, paid our taxes and didn’t get in trouble we would be allowed to stay,” said one Salvadoran with two children born in the U.S. _____ Image Credit Doug Mills/The New York Times 2. World leaders are unsure whether to take President Trump’s tweets as policy pronouncements or to ignore the sometimes impulsive thoughts. At home, Mr. Trump’s approval rating remains mired in the 30s, suggesting significant political weakness , despite a surging stock market, low unemployment and weakened ISIS. Over the weekend, his former aide Stephen K. Bannon tried to back away from his most inflammatory comments quoted in a new book. Mr. Trump traveled to Tennessee on Monday to address a group of farmers , who are carefully watching his trade policies. _____ Image Credit Damon Winter/The New York Times 3. The Golden Globes proved to be half-party, half-protest on Sunday, as women largely used their platform to speak out against harassment and gender inequality . Men, on the other hand, were mostly conspicuously silent on the subject. All eyes were on how Hollywood’s brightest would address the issue. Most wore black, which the Times columnist Vanessa Friedman said produced “one of the most elegant, genuinely chic red carpets I’ve seen in Hollywood.” As for the actual awards, here’s a list of the winners . _____ Image Credit Ramin Rahimian/Reuters 4. Oprah Winfrey , seen above campaigning for Barack Obama in 2007, was the award show’s big winner, so much so that many of her fans were begging her to run for president in 2020. She struck a hopeful tone as she accepted the Cecil B. DeMille award for lifetime achievement, envisioning “a time when nobody ever has to say, ‘Me too,’ again.” Whether she runs or not, there’s plenty politicians could learn from her. Read her full speech , which earned rapturous praise in the auditorium and on social media. _____ Image Credit Al Drago for The New York Times 5. The U.S. Supreme Court reopened a death penalty case, giving an inmate in Georgia a fresh chance at a new trial because of a white juror’s racist statements . Keith Tharpe was convicted in 1991 of killing his estranged wife’s sister, Jaquelin Freeman, as he kidnapped and raped his wife. But a juror, explaining his thinking years later, said the convict “wasn’t in the ‘good’ black folks category.” The juror added that after studying the Bible, he “wondered if black people even have souls.” The majority opinion said a lower court should reconsider its decision not to hear Mr. Tharpe’s appeal. _____ Image Credit Tony Gentile/Reuters 6. Italy’s ban on plastic bags for fruit, vegetables and baked goods, which took effect on Jan. 1, has not gone over well . The law requires that biodegradable and compostable alternatives be used instead of plastic, which takes hundreds of years to degrade. The bags can’t be given out free, so the 1- to 3-euro cent charge appears on bills. Supermarkets have protested, some affixing apologetic signs on their storefronts. And politicians are taking heat from seemingly all fronts, including opposition leaders and environmentalists who say the laws’s execution was bungled. _____ Image Credit Jamie Squire/Getty Images 7. Georgia and Alabama will play in the college football national championship game Monday night in an all-SEC showdown. The game starts at 8 p.m. Eastern on ESPN. Listen closely during the game and you might repeatedly hear “Battle Hymn of the Republic,” a song with a decidedly Northern flavor that Georgia has made its own . Though most famous as a Civil War anthem that cast the South as a serpent, the university and its fans know it as “Glory, Glory,” an unofficial fight song recast with its own lyrics. Out goes “His truth is marching on.” In goes “G-E-O-R-G-I-A.” _____ Image Credit Luke Sharrett for The New York Times 8. Three major hurricanes . Wildfires. Hailstorms. Drought. Flooding. Tornadoes. Freeze. They all added up to make 2017 the most expensive year on record for natural disasters in the United States, with $306 billion in damage. In 1980, there were three natural disasters that caused more than $1 billion in damage in today’s dollars. This year, there were 16. _____ Image Credit Jose Luis Magana/Associated Press 9. Public health officials said this winter’s flu season is turning into a “moderately severe” one, and it may get worse because of an imperfect vaccine and incessant cold weather. Another menace of the cold: Park authorities in Washington had to tell people not to skate or walk on the Reflecting Pool on the National Mall after several people broke through. In such frigid times, the homeless in New York commonly turn to the E train , which they know stays underground. _____ Image Credit The New York Times 10. Finally , when The Times advertised a job opening to visit all of its 52 Places to Go, we received more than 13,000 applications in nine days. Later this week you’ll meet the person who earned the job, along with this year’s 52 destinations. But until then, take a look at a snapshot of the candidates , a global cross-section of people that includes a father and daughter, a professional adventure cartoonist and the “Friday Night Lights” author Buzz Bissinger. They’d all make fine travel companions. We hope you have a spectacular evening. Your Evening Briefing is posted at 6 p.m. Eastern. And don’t miss Your Morning Briefing , posted weekdays at 6 a.m. Eastern, and Your Weekend Briefing, posted at 6 a.m. Sundays. Want to catch up on past briefings? You can browse them here . If photographs appear out of order, please download the updated New York Times app from iTunes or Google Play . What did you like? What do you want to see here? Let us know at briefing@nytimes.com . Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              