   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Theater Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Theater Review Mashing Mismatched Movies (and Fur Hats and Lawn Chairs) Into Drama Image "Alan Smithee Directed This Play: Triple Feature" with, from left, Chris Giarmo, Tymberly Canale, Cynthia Hopkins (on table) and Elizabeth DeMent, at the Brooklyn Academy of Music’s Harvey Theater. Credit Ruby Washington/The New York Times Big Dance Theater: Alan Smithee Directed This Play Off Broadway, Dance Play , Play Closing Date: Oct. 3, 2014 Brooklyn Academy of Music - Harvey Theater , 651 Fulton St. 718-636-4100 More Information By  Alexis Soloski Oct. 1, 2014 Is there a movie marathon more unlikely than the ’80s weepie “Terms of Endearment,” followed by the ’70s noir “Le Cercle Rouge” and topped with the ’60s Euro-rhapsody “Doctor Zhivago” ? Not all the popcorn and Raisinets in the world could justify a lineup like that. And yet in “Alan Smithee Directed This Play: Triple Feature,” at the Brooklyn Academy of Music’s Next Wave Festival, Big Dance Theater pulps these same three flicks into a patchwork of fur hats, lawn chairs, rotary telephones, cigarettes, handguns and torment. There’s little reason and less sense, but the piece is conceived and performed with wit and flair. And those fur hats are pretty nifty. “Alan Smithee” is the pseudonym the Directors Guild of America uses when one of its own is so dissatisfied with a film that he or she refuses credit. That’s clearly an in-joke between Big Dance’s long-married co-directors, the choreographer Annie-B Parson and the performer Paul Lazar. On a mostly bare stage, seven actors (Mr. Lazar among them) whirl and sweep, reciting lines from the various films and the books that inspired them. Promiscuously, the performers trade roles and sometimes several actors will play the same character in the same scene. Fall Arts Preview - Times 100 How to wade through the crush of culture coming your way this season? Here’s a guide to 100 events that have us especially excited, in order of appearance. Sept. 4, 2014 Often so much is happening that it’s hard to take it all in. The eye slides from one pas de deux to the next and then back toward the vertical blinds that serve as a projection screen and then forward toward a new scene. Ms. Parson’s particular gift is for evolving everyday gestures (squaring shoulders, downing a drink, hanging up a phone) into the stuff of dance. She exploits it nicely here. At times I found myself wishing that Ms. Parson and Mr. Lazar would share their jokes, that they would offer something more (a plot? a theme?) to tie these sources together. Now only dream logic and panache and sly costuming (courtesy of Oana Botez) bind them. But who would trade rationality for Cynthia Hopkins’s songs, Aaron Mattocks’s litheness, Tymberly Canale’s sardonic glamour, Mr. Lazar’s bizarrely appealing Jack Nicholson impression? In a scene toward the end, the actors seem to drop character as they relax and chat among themselves. Only Ms. Canale leans away. “I don’t know what they’re talking about,” she says. “I honestly don’t.” She doesn’t seem to mind. We shouldn’t either. Big Dance Theater: Alan Smithee Directed This Play Brooklyn Academy of Music - Harvey Theater 651 Fulton St. Brooklyn 718-636-4100 bam.org Category Off Broadway, Dance Play , Play Opened Sept. 29, 2014 Closed Oct. 3, 2014 This information was last updated on Nov. 6, 2017 “Alan Smithee Directed This Play: Triple Feature” continues through Saturday at the Brooklyn Academy of Music’s Harvey Theater, 651 Fulton Street, Fort Greene; 718-636-4100, bam.org. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page C 6 of the New York edition with the headline: Mashing Mismatched Movies (and Fur Hats and Lawn Chairs) Into Drama . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              