   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by The Ethicist Do You Tell a Friend His Daughter Is Sexually Active? Image Credit Illustration by La Tigre By  Amy Bloom , Jack Shafer and Kenji Yoshino March 18, 2015 A man told me he was approached by his best friend’s daughter, a minor, who confided that she and her boyfriend had become sexually active. She wanted his opinion on birth control. The man says he would want to know if it were his daughter, but to tell the parents would violate the girl’s trust. What do I tell him? NAME WITHHELD, CONNECTICUT Amy Bloom: The age of the minor has some impact on my answer, but without knowing that, I would encourage the man to go back to the girl and strongly encourage her to tell her father or her mother. If she were 14 or 15, I would give it a full-court press. Is it right to tell the father or the mother if I’ve been asked in confidence? I don’t think so, but I would very much push the girl to release me from that. The other thing is that it’s kind to talk with her. I would want to engage her in a couple of conversations about why she chose to come to me rather than anyone else. Jack Shafer: Just because a best friend’s daughter has informed you that she and her boyfriend are getting frisky doesn’t give you automatic cause to intervene in her relationship — unless she’s 14 or 15, but I gather from this question that she’s not that minor of a minor. Bloom: I don’t think we can gather that. I don’t think there’s any indication of how young a minor she is. Shafer: If someone is going to pose an ethical question like this, they would include that she’s 13 or 14, if she were really a minor minor. So because there’s not that emphasis, I’m going on the assumption that she’s 16 or 17 or maybe a few weeks shy of 18. In any event, I would limit interventions to directing her to the most reliable sources of opinion on birth control: a doctor, Planned Parenthood, maybe a clergyman. But as long as her boyfriend is also a minor, nothing necessarily illegal or wildly immoral is going on here, and I don’t think her question is a sufficient trigger to violate her confidence. Kenji Yoshino: I’m curious about the fact that both of you have focused on the question of how minor a minor she is. If she were a 13-year-old with the maturity to ask this question, would you betray the confidence or no? Shafer: If the letter writer had said “an adolescent,” then we could pursue the question with real vigor. But we have no evidence that she is an adolescent. Bloom: Her being 15 or 16 or 17 actually is not the pivotal thing for me. This is a young person who’s troubled by something, who comes to an adult to talk about a problem. If we’re talking about ethics, you don’t turn your back on somebody who has come to you to talk. Part of what I want to encourage is kindness, because that is part of an ethical life as well as being aware of your obligations. Yoshino: Both of you persuaded me. I was agonizing about whether or not the fact that she was a minor would allow the man to break the confidence, but after listening to you, you have to respect the girl’s maturity in coming to you in the first place. You don’t want to chill people from coming to you in the future. Shafer: The girl is in no immediate harm. I mean, if she said, “I don’t want my dad to know, but I purchased a handgun, and I’m going to blow my brains out unless the Detroit Tigers win the World Series, don’t tell my dad,” I think that you can violate the confidence there. I don’t think this rises to the threshold. I work in a small, family-owned retail furniture store with one other employee, my manager. From time to time, she will bring in one or both of her children, who are 11 and 13. She made it clear to me that the owner would be quite unhappy if he became aware of this. I have been in a quandary because it doesn’t seem fair to the kids, and there have been times that I was unable to access computer equipment because one of them needed to do schoolwork. And there is also the question of safety, as I have had to climb over blanketed children to get to supplies. My excuse for not reporting these visits is that my manager is a single working mom. But my conscience tells me I should tell the store owner about the situation. NAME WITHHELD Shafer: It wouldn’t be unethical for you to complain to your manager’s boss about your manager’s workplace conduct. Millions do it every second. But a question to the letter writer: Are you afraid that you’ll get fired if you complain? Self-preservation has its ethical dimension too. Bloom: That was actually one of the things that I thought of, which is: Are you afraid that you will get fired if you do complain? Or are you afraid that you will get fired if you don’t complain and Big Boss finds out? It’s kind of a drag for her to have these kids around and to have to tactfully kick a 13-year-old off the computer while the mother is standing there. It would be ethical for the letter writer to go to her co-worker, to Single Mom, and say: “I’m really uncomfortable with the kids coming in, given that you’ve told me that Big Boss would be very unhappy about this. How about if we go in together, and you say you need to bring your kids in, and I say that it’s O.K. with me if you bring your kids in when you have to. If it goes well, you will tell your kids to stay off the work computer when I need it and make every effort to behave themselves beautifully.” Yoshino: That sounds like a great solution, except I’m intuiting that there’s some kind of power dynamic going on here, where the boss is not going to respond favorably to this. So what’s Plan B? What if the single-mother manager turns to the letter writer and says: “Look, I’m your boss. This is not my problem.” Then what? Shafer: I don’t know that there’s a huge problem in going and telling your big boss that your manager is violating company policy or directives or anything like that. Bloom: Oh, I don’t think there’s any problem with that at all. Talk to the problem person first and then go to Big Boss. My sister-in-law recently quit her job. She is three months pregnant and actively seeking new employment. She is considering job offers and would potentially start a new job and almost immediately go on maternity leave. Is it ethical to withhold this information from a new employer? NAME WITHHELD Bloom: Kenji, would you mind filling us in a little bit on the legal part of this? Yoshino: Congress enacted the Pregnancy Discrimination Act of 1978, which said that not only is pregnancy discrimination not permissible for covered workplaces under Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, but also that pregnancy discrimination is defined as sex discrimination. So she’s perfectly within her rights to do this. But that still leaves open the question of whether or not she is behaving ethically if she knows that she is going to be taking a leave when accepting this job. Bloom: She presumes that the pregnancy will go well — not every pregnancy does — and that she will be at work for six months and then she will return after a break, which in America sometimes is as short as three weeks, depending on your job. I also understand that the employer would be very annoyed not to have this information. On the other hand, as the employer I would also want a wide range of people to reveal to me the many other qualities they have that will prove disruptive to our workplace — and they do not do so and they never will. So it’s legal for her to withhold this information, and it’s ethical as well. Yoshino: I want to make a different case. The reason that Congress got so wound up about this is that it’s impossible to have real sex equality unless we have a pregnancy-discrimination act. I am supportive of the letter writer’s sister-in-law not because pregnancy is so much like other things, but precisely because it’s not like other things. It is something that only women have to deal with. If we want true equality for women in the workplace, we have to allow individuals to have discretion about this, because employers will discriminate against them. Bloom: I like your answer better. Yours is the more positive case, which is that it is legal and ethical to withhold and, given the greater issues about employment equality, it’s important to withhold the information. Shafer: Well, because it’s illegal, it sort of moots the whole topic doesn’t it? This specific case is almost out of the realm of an ethical quandary. Yoshino: But is that true? The employer is certainly legally barred from asking, but the prospective employee is not legally barred from volunteering the information. So you could argue that she has an ethical obligation to give the employer a heads-up. Shafer: I think it’s probably ethical to withhold a whole host of information from a prospective employer. Bloom: Right, and that’s what I was trying to say, that there are lots of things that people don’t reveal and they’re not ethically required to. This conversation is an edited and condensed version of a podcast in which the panelists engage in further debate. Amy Bloom is a novelist and psychotherapist. Her most recent book is “Lucky Us.” Jack Shafer is the media columnist for Politico. Kenji Yoshino is an author and the Chief Justice Earl Warren professor of constitutional law at the N.Y.U. School of Law.  To submit a query: Record one at 212-556-7070; send email to ethicists @nytimes.com ; or send mail to The Ethicists, The New York Times Magazine, 620 Eighth Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10018. (Include a daytime phone number.)  Sign up for our newsletter to get the best of The New York Times Magazine delivered to your inbox every week. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page 20 of the Sunday Magazine with the headline: Do You Tell a Friend That His Daughter Is Having Sex? . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              