   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by The Haggler The Unwanted Rites of Summer Phone Service By  David Segal June 20, 2014 Email haggler@nytimes.com . Keep it brief and family-friendly, include your hometown and go easy on the caps-lock key. Letters may be edited for clarity and length. _____ Lately, the Haggler has been spending time on corporate chat lines to see if any of the reps are actually computers masquerading as humans. You have your hobbies; the Haggler has his. This started after a recent episode that included a transcript of a customer chatting online with American Express. To the Haggler’s eyes, the answers from the company’s rep read like a computer pretending to be a person, but American Express said that wasn’t the case, and the Haggler’s own experiments came to the same conclusion. The online conversation seemed a tad stilted, not because the company’s rep was a machine, it turned out, but because the rep’s command of English was kind of spotty. In further experiments, the Haggler has yet to find a chatbot feigning sentience. But he has encountered some reps that are either (A) based in a foreign country or (B) based in the United States but cagey about supplying helpful details to confirm their geographic location. That second situation has yielded the most amusing exchanges. Like this recent online chat with a rep at Verizon, named Ami: Haggler: Where are you located? I’m in New York City. Ami: I am in upstate New York. Haggler: Where in upstate New York? Ami: I am sorry I am not able to give out an exact location. Haggler: O.K., what is the governor’s most famous initiative? Ami: Sorry I don’t get into other people’s private lives. Huh? This left the Haggler wondering what exactly Ami thought the word “initiative” meant. Girlfriend? Texting mishap? Body part? With this mystery fresh in mind, a Verizon-related email happened to arrive: Q. Each year, a few days before I reopen my summer home on Martha’s Vineyard, I contact Verizon and ask to have my telephone and Internet service reconnected. With rare exceptions, the process is maddening. I’m a doctor and I need to be in touch with patients. So the amount of dread I feel when I first pick up the phone each year in this house — hoping to hear a dial tone — is hard to overstate. If the line is dead, I know I’m in for hours of calling the company from another phone and days of delays, followed by more hours of calls. This spring, when I opened my house, I discovered that I had no dial tone. I drove to a part of the island where my (AT&T) cellphone works and asked for a technician to visit. One did, but it took days. When I returned the next weekend, I had a dial tone but no Internet service. And when I tried to place a long-distance call, I heard an automated message saying that long distance isn’t part of my service plan. Image Credit Christoph Hitz With a perfunctory apology, a service rep said she would reinstate my original plan but that it would take another four days because “the system does not allow me to do this any sooner.” Exasperated, I asked who was in charge of customer service, and this woman, who identified herself only as Dotty, said she was. And that’s where the conversation ended. I’d like help with my phone and Internet connection, but I’m hoping that the Haggler can ask Verizon for more than a one-time fix. Why does this need to be annual ordeal? TALIA HERMAN, CHILMARK, MASS. A. By the time the Haggler read Ms. Herman’s letter, Verizon had fixed her Internet service and reinstated her long distance. Which is great. But this process took days and too many phone calls, and Ms. Herman says that whenever she talks to neighbors, they all have similar stories. Verizon, for some reason, can’t seem to deliver on Martha’s Vineyard. Reached by the Haggler, a Verizon spokesman, William Kula, said he would ask a member of the company’s “customer advocacy team” to contact Ms. Herman to make sure she was now happy. That team member offered to take $10 a month off Ms. Herman’s bill for 12 months. Well, that’s nice. Verizon’s charm mode was working smoothly until, in one of his emails, Mr. Kula broke the Haggler’s first rule for any corporation trying to make amends: Never imply that a customer is partially to blame for problems caused by the company. That is particularly true if the customer is in no way to blame for those problems. “It appears,” Mr. Kula wrote last week, “as if the customer changed the date for the restoration of service from April 15 to April 2.” This seemed to suggest that Ms. Herman threw Verizon for a little loop, reducing the time that the company had to get her phone in working order. “Baloney,” Ms. Herman said when she read Mr. Kula’s letter. She said that she did ask to change the date, but that she made the request about a week before April 2. “The Verizon rep said, no problem,” she recalled. Maybe the Haggler misunderstood Mr. Kula’s point in mentioning this change of date. “I’m merely relaying information I got from my colleague,” he wrote in a follow-up. And he segued nicely into mea culpa mode. “As to the broader question of letting down Ms. Herman, I can say that Verizon apologizes for the level of service she has received at her home on the Vineyard and the missed deadline. That is unacceptable to us,” he wrote. “Our products and the customer experience must, together, exceed customer expectations in order for us to retain their business.” Actually, that’s not true, at least in this case. Ms. Herman would have happily switched to a different carrier many infuriating phone calls ago. But where she lives, Verizon is the only option. And maybe this has something to do with what she describes as the company’s consistently shabby treatment. She has nowhere to go. EMAIL: haggler@nytimes.com. Keep it brief and family-friendly, include your hometown and go easy on the caps-lock key. Letters may be edited for clarity and length.  A version of this article appears in print on , on Page BU 4 of the New York edition with the headline: The Unwanted Rites of Summer Phone Service . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              