   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index New York Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Lauren Liebes, Jonathan Cabin Jan. 15, 2017 Lauren Carly Liebes and Dr. Jonathan Ari Cabin are to be married Jan. 15 in Pocantico Hills, N.Y. Cantor Josh Konigsberg is to officiate at Blue Hill at Stone Barns. Ms. Liebes, 35, is an associate focusing on trust and estate law at the Los Angeles law firm Sheppard, Mullin, Richter & Hampton. She graduated cum laude from Boston University, and received a law degree from Southwestern Law School and a master’s degree in taxation and a certificate in estate planning from Georgetown. She is a daughter of Sherry L. Liebes of Arlington, Va., and Gerald N. Liebes of Woodbridge, Va. The bride’s father retired as the chief learning officer of the Federal Communications Commission in Washington. Her mother is an educational consultant focusing on professional development for teachers in Arlington. The bride is a stepdaughter of Judith B. Liebes and Michael C. Greenbaum. Dr. Cabin, 37, is a facial plastic and reconstructive surgeon at the Center for Advanced Facial Plastic Surgery in Beverly Hills, Calif., and a co-founder and the chief medical officer of Docola, a digital health company based in Largo, Fla., that focuses on online education for patients. He graduated from the University of Pennsylvania and received a medical degree from Yale. He is a son of Dr. Florence Comite of New York and Dr. Henry S. Cabin of Woodbridge, Conn. The groom’s mother is a endocrinologist and the owner of the Comite Center for Precision Medicine in New York. She is also the author of “Keep It Up: The Power of Precision Medicine to Conquer Low T and Revitalize Your Life.” His father is a professor of medicine and the interim chief of cardiovascular medicine at the Yale School of Medicine and the medical director at Yale New Haven Hospital Heart and Vascular Center. The groom is a stepson of Laura D. Cabin. The couple were introduced through a mutual friend in September 2013 in Los Angeles. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page ST 9 of the New York edition with the headline: Lauren Liebes,  Jonathan Cabin . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              