   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Weddings Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by This Week’s Wedding Announcements A look at our latest featured couples. April 1, 2018 Sally Newman, Romain Guimard Image Credit Lev Kuperman By  Rosalie R. Radomsky In 2013 when Sally Corbette Newman, who does acroyoga (yoga plus acrobatics) and circus arts on the side, heard her friend was about to host Romain Philippe Guimard, a bona fide French acrobat, through Couchsurfing.com, she persuaded her friend to let him stay with her instead. “You don’t get a ton of opportunities to host a professional circus performer,” said Ms. Newman, who had been dazzled by his circus troupe at the Spoleto Festival in Charleston. “It’s a contemporary circus, not big-top Ringling Bros. and Barnum & Bailey stuff,” she said. “It’s a lot more muted, a lot more modern. It’s a magical spectacle.” She took a break from work that afternoon to screen him over coffee at Normandy Farm Artisan Bakery in downtown Charleston, and after they managed to connect and communicate, despite the fact she spoke little French and he little English, she handed over the keys. “It was very natural with Sally,” said Mr. Guimard, who took in local sights on his own by day, and spent evenings with her. Read More Emily Cashman, Harrell Kirstein Image Credit Sean M. Downey Emily Louise Cashman and Harrell Raso Kirstein were married March 29 at the Manchester City Hall in Manchester N.H. Joanne Doukeris, a member of the city clerk’s office, officiated. On March 31, Senator Jeanne Shaheen, Democrat of New Hampshire and a friend of the couple, led an exchange of vows at the Bedford Village Inn, a hotel in Bedford, N.H. The bride, 32, works in Washington as the senior manager of government affairs at Thorn , a nonprofit organization based in San Francisco that builds technology to defend children from sexual abuse. From 2010 to 2016, the bride worked in various positions for Senator Shaheen. She also worked as the trip director for Hillary Clinton’s general election campaign in New Hampshire in 2016. She graduated from the College of the Holy Cross in Worcester, Mass., and received a master’s degree in international relations from the Universidad Autónoma de Madrid in Spain. She is the daughter of Madeline Q. Cashman and Brian A. Cashman of Litchfield, N.H. The bride’s father retired as a special agent in the Andover, Mass., field office of the Defense Security Service, a federal security agency of the Defense Department based in Quantico, Va. Her mother is a teacher at the Matthew Thornton Elementary School in Londonderry, N.H. The groom, 31, is the communications director for the Trump War Room for American Bridge 21st Century, a democratic opposition research group in Washington. He served as the communications director for Ms. Shaheen’s re-election campaign in 2014 as well as in communication positions in Mrs. Clinton’s 2016 presidential campaign. He is a son of Melinda R. Kirstein and Philip L. Kirstein of Princeton, N.J. The groom’s mother retired as a fixed-income portfolio manager in the Plainsboro, N.J., office of Merrill Lynch. She currently works as an independent trustee of the WisdomTree Trust board in New York. His father retired as the senior officer and independent compliance officer of the AllianceBernstein mutual funds in New York. The couple met in 2010 while both were working for the New Hampshire Democratic Party. Meghal Shah, Shaan-Chirag Gandhi Image Meghal Bipin Shah and Dr. Shaan-Chirag Chandrahas Gandhi were married March 31 at the Ritz-Carlton, Sarasota, in Sarasota, Fla. Pandit Jinit Bhatt, a Hindu priest, officiated during a Jain ceremony. Mrs. Gandhi, 32, is an associate in the tax credit transactions practice in the Boston office of Holland & Knight, a law firm based in Florida. She graduated from N.Y.U. and received a law degree from Boston College. She is a daughter of Ketki B Shah and Dr. Bipin D. Shah of Fort Myers, Fla. The bride’s father is an obstetrician and gynecologist there with the Lee Physician Group. Her mother is a vice president on the Lee Memorial Auxiliary at the HealthPark Medical Center, also in Fort Myers. Dr. Gandhi, also 32, is a resident physician in internal medicine at the Massachusetts General Hospital in Boston. In June, he is to start as principal at the Longwood Fund, a health care venture capital firm in Boston. Also in June, he is to begin working as an attending hospital medicine physician at Massachusetts General and an instructor in medicine at Harvard Medical School. He graduated from Case Western Reserve University in Cleveland, and received a D.Phil. in medical oncology from the University of Oxford, where he was a Rhodes scholar. He also received a medical degree and an M.B.A. from Harvard. He is the son of Kalpana C. O. Gandhi and Chandrahas O. Gandhi of Battle Creek, Mich. The groom’s mother is a retired sonographer there. His father is an industrial engineering consultant, also in Battle Creek. The couple met in 2015 through the dating app Hinge. Jared Wehrle, Lee Tracy II Image Credit John Ngo Jared William Wehrle and Lee Arwood Tracy II were married March 31 at a private residence owned by Miranda Brown in Galveston, Tex. Brian J. Schwenk, a friend of the couple who became ordained through American Marriage Ministries for the event, officiated. Mr. Wehrle (left), 33, is a lawyer with the City Solicitor’s Office of the City of Toronto. He graduated from Concordia University in Montreal and received a law degree from the University of Victoria in British Columbia, Canada. He is a son of Christine J. Wehrle and Mark W. Wehrle of Winnipeg, Manitoba. His father retired as the president of Perimeter Aviation, a Canadian regional airline based in Winnipeg. Mr. Tracy, 24, is a registered nurse in the neuro-oncology unit at Dell Seton Medical Center, a Trauma I level hospital in Austin, Tex. He has a bachelor of science degree from Sam Houston State University and a bachelor of nursing from the University of Texas. He is the son of Laura Michelle Soto-Reyes of Houston and Mr. Tracy of Magnolia, Tex. His mother is the area director of sales for Hyatt Hotels Caribe in San Juan. The couple met in March 2017 at a cafe in Galveston. Valerie Veatch, Benjamin Rampton Image Credit Kevin Veatch Valerie Veatch and Benjamin Michael John Rampton were married March 31 at the Fourth Universalist Society in New York. The Rev. Carolyn Strauss, a Universal Life Church minister, performed the ceremony. The bride, 32, is a documentary filmmaker based in New York. She directed and edited “Me @ The Zoo,” a documentary on HBO in 2012 and again in 2013, and also directed and produced “Love Child,” another documentary on HBO in 2014 and 2015. She graduated with distinction from the New School. She is a daughter of Christina Marie Kimball and Kevin Veatch, both of Seattle. The bride’s father is a creative director and music producer there. Her mother is a business coach and a fleet captain at the Seattle Yacht Club. The groom, 35, is a vice president specializing in prime brokerage at JPMorgan Chase in New York. He graduated from Edinburgh University, from which he received a master’s in classics. He is a son of Janet Rampton and Christopher Rampton, both of London. The groom’s father is the director of LTT Capital Partners, an investment management firm in London. The couple met in June 2016 while dancing at Mr. Fong’s, a bar in New York. Janelle Teng, Jeffrey Eng Image Credit Chelsea Abril Janelle Elaine Teng and Jeffrey Steven Eng were married March 31 at the Pierre hotel in New York. Ted Teng, the father of the bride who was ordained by the American Fellowship Church for the occasion, officiated. The couple met in 2008 at Cornell, from which they graduated. Ms. Teng, 28, is a business manager at Condé Nast, where she works on the finance team for GQ, Wired, Golf Digest, Ars Technica and Pitchfork. She is a daughter of Jane L. Wong-Teng and Mr. Teng of Plano, Tex. The bride’s father works in New York as the president and the chief executive of Leading Hotels of the World, a luxury hospitality company based in New York. Mr. Eng, 30, works in Hoboken, N.J., as a strategy and analytics manager at Walmart Global eCommerce based in Bentonville, Ark., where he works on the home category team. He is a son of Lilian S. Eng and Leo Eng of Cos Cob, Conn. The groom’s mother is a real estate broker at Park Allyn Realty Associates in Greenwich, Conn. His father is a manager of Thomas Cleaners, a dry cleaning company in Greenwich. Ariana Angrisani, Michael Wilson Ariana Elexa Angrisani and Michael Edward Wilson were married March 30 at the Manhattan Marriage Bureau. On April 21, Matthew Angrisani, a cousin of the bride, is to lead a second ceremony at the Steam Whistle Brewery in Toronto, where he will be commenting on the couple’s relationship. The couple, both 31, met at the University of Michigan, from which they graduated. Mrs. Wilson is a senior marketing manager for lifestyle brands at the Authentic Brands Group, a New York-based licensing and branding company. She is a daughter of Susan J. V. Angrisani and Angelo F. Angrisani of New York. The bride’s father is a sales representative at Eli’s Breads in New York. Her mother is a business development manager at Colavita USA, an importer of olive oil and other foods, in Edison, N.J. Mr. Wilson is a corporate vice president at New York Life Insurance in New York. He is the son of Gene E. Wilson and Donald D. Wilson of Pickering, Ontario. The groom’s mother is a digital marketing specialist for Yellow Pages in Toronto. His father, who also works in Toronto, is a nuclear engineer for Candu, a Canadian pressurized heavy water reactor designed to generate electric power. Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              