   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Television Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by What to Watch Saturday Image Mya Taylor, left, and Kitana Kiki Rodriguez in “Tangerine.” Credit Magnolia Pictures By  Kathryn Shattuck Nov. 28, 2015 Take a walk on the wild side with “Tangerine,” watch the Property Brothers build edible homes and choose between a couple of spy movies — one real, one not so much. What’s Streaming TANGERINE (2015) on iTunes. Sin-Dee and Alexandra — a couple of fast-talking and fast-walking transgender sex workers played with exuberant heart by Kitana Kiki Rodriguez and Mya Taylor — scour Hollywood for the woman Sin-Dee’s boyfriend (and pimp) stepped out on her with while she was in jail. Sean Baker’s raucous comedy, shot on some tricked-out iPhones, “encompasses dizzying multitudes,” Manohla Dargis wrote in The New York Times . “It’s a neo-screwball chase flick with a dash of Rainer Werner Fassbinder — but mostly, movingly, it is a female-friendship movie about two people who each started life with an XY chromosome set.” (Image: Ms. Taylor, left, and Ms. Rodriguez) What’s On TV ALL-STAR GINGERBREAD BUILD  8 p.m. on Food Network. The pastry chefs Ron Ben-Israel and Duff Goldman each pair off with one of the Property Brothers, Drew and Jonathan Scott, to see which team can build the most lavish, life-size, edible gingerbread house in 72 hours. Image Gregory Peck as Atticus Finch. Credit Universal Studios THE ESSENTIALS: TO KILL A MOCKINGBIRD (1962) 8 p.m. on TCM. Atticus Finch, the way we want to remember him. Sally Field and Robert Osborne explain why this film is still required viewing. (Image: Gregory Peck as Atticus) Image Colin Firth, left, and Taron Egerton in "Kingsman: The Secret Service." Credit Jaap Buitendijk/Twentieth Century Fox KINGSMAN: THE SECRET SERVICE (2015) 8 p.m. on HBO. Colin Firth has his suits splattered as a spy in an agency hidden behind a Savile Row tailor shop. Taron Egerton is the trainee whose duds are more b-boy than bespoke. And Samuel L. Jackson is the villain, whose henchwoman comes armed with razor-sharp leg prosthetics and deadly moves. The director Matthew Vaughn’s “real talent is for delivering extreme violence with a shrug and a smile,” Manohla Dargis wrote in The Times . (Image: Mr. Firth, left, and Mr. Egerton) THE SPYMASTERS — C.I.A. IN THE CROSSHAIRS (2015) 9 p.m. on Showtime. Jules and Gédéon Naudet investigate the Central Intelligence Agency’s conduct in its war on terror, including interrogation techniques, secret prisons and drones. The 12 living C.I.A. directors, past and present, are interviewed: George H. W. Bush, Stansfield Turner, William H. Webster, Robert M. Gates, R. James Woolsey, John M. Deutch, George J. Tenet, Porter Goss, Michael V. Hayden, Leon E. Panetta, David H. Petraeus and John O. Brennan. DOCTOR WHO  9 p.m. on BBC America. Now that his companion Clara is dead, the Doctor — and Peter Capaldi, who plays him — goes it alone in this one-man episode as he faces a fearsome creature known as the Veil. PUNKIN CHUNKIN ALL-STARS  9 p.m. on Science. Fans vote on their favorite all-time pumpkin hurlers. 48 HOURS  10 p.m. on CBS. On a quest for closure and forgiveness, Jeanne Bishop meets with David Biro, who was 16 when he shot and killed her sister and brother-in-law. He was tried as an adult and sentenced to two mandatory life terms with a discretionary sentence for the death of the couple’s unborn child. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page C 6 of the New York edition with the headline: What’s on TV Saturday . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              