   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Television Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by What’s On TV Sunday By  Kathryn Shattuck Oct. 12, 2014 10 P.M. (Showtime) THE AFFAIR Noah (Dominic West), a New York City schoolteacher and novelist summering in Montauk with his wife (Maura Tierney) and their four children, embarks on a dalliance with Alison (Ruth Wilson), a waitress at a diner trying to regroup with her husband (Joshua Jackson) after a tragedy, in this new series set against the backdrop of Montauk and presented in flashbacks from each of their perspectives, which don’t always align. “The mystery of the show, and the fun of it, is figuring out whose version is closer to the truth, while making allowances for tendencies dictated as much by gender as self-interest,” Alessandra Stanley wrote in The New York Times. “The parallels twist and at times cross, but their stolen moments and dissonant memories are only part of a larger puzzle. There is no mystery to an extramarital affair, except in ‘The Affair.’ ” 10 A.M. (Fox) FOX NEWS SUNDAY Theodore B. Olson, solicitor general under President George W. Bush, and Tony Perkins, the president of the Family Research Council, discuss the Supreme Court’s recent decision to let stand appeals court rulings allowing same-sex marriages in Indiana, Oklahoma, Utah, Virginia and Wisconsin. 10:30 A.M. (CBS) FACE THE NATION Leon E. Panetta, the former defense secretary and C.I.A. director, talks about his memoir, “Worthy Fights,” written with Jim Newton. Dr. Thomas R. Frieden, the director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, and Representative Michael McCaul, Republican of Texas, discuss the latest on the Ebola outbreak. 7 P.M. (ABC) AMERICA’S FUNNIEST HOME VIDEOS Tom Bergeron hosts this 25th-season opener, which features clips of ice-bucket challenges gone wrong, a flying fairy and humorous dogs. The winner will receive $10,000, the chance to compete for $100,000 and, ultimately, a vacation package. 8 P.M. (13, 49) THE PARADISE, SEASON 2 Moray (Emun Elliott) faces off against Katherine (Elaine Cassidy) and Tom (Ben Daniels) as a new head of ladies’ wear is chosen. In “Inspector Lewis, Season 7: The Lions of Nema,” at 9, Lewis (Kevin Whately), Hathaway (Laurence Fox) and Maddox (Angela Griffin) investigate the murder of an American classics student at Oxford, where all eyes have turned to a young professor who had recently ended an affair with her. 8 P.M. (CBS) MADAM SECRETARY Elizabeth (Téa Leoni) finds the peace treaty she delicately brokered between China and Japan threatened by a Chinese student seeking political asylum. In “The Good Wife,” at 9, Alicia (Julianna Margulies) reconsiders running for state’s attorney with the help of Eli (Alan Cumming) and a campaign manager (Steven Pasquale). 9 P.M. (AMC) THE WALKING DEAD Rick (Andrew Lincoln) and the group discover their vulnerabilities in this Season 5 opener. The episode is discussed on “The Talking Dead,” at 10. 10:30 P.M. (13) THEATER CLOSE-UP Sigourney Weaver hosts this series, a collaboration between PBS and a group of Off Broadway theaters, which presents a cross section of plays. It continues with “Hellman v. McCarthy,” about the libel lawsuit that resulted when, in 1979 on “The Dick Cavett Show,” the author Mary McCarthy stated that “every word” the playwright Lillian Hellman “writes is a lie, including ‘and’ and ‘the.’ ” Roberta Maxwell plays Hellman, Marcia Rodd is McCarthy and Dick Cavett is himself in this Abingdon Theater Company production. “It’s hard to imagine this new play by Brian Richard Mori without Mr. Cavett’s astringently funny presence, which adds layers of charm and verisimilitude to a slender dramatic reconsideration of a famous literary feud,” Charles Isherwood wrote in The Times. What’s Streaming Now SUMMER FESTIVALS IN REPLAY Medici.tv presents recaps of performances culled from the Verbier Festival in Switzerland, the Salzburg Festival in Austria, the Annecy Classic Festival and Festival d’Aix-en-Provence in France, and Operalia, Plácido Domingo’s opera competition, hosted this year by the Los Angeles Opera. ( medici.tv ) KATHRYN SHATTUCK A version of this article appears in print on , on Page SP 11 of the New York edition with the headline: What’s On TV Sunday . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              