   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index New York Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Character Study New York’s Noises? It’s Music to Her Image Elena Kowalsky, left, who has perfect pitch, listened to high school students singing in Times Square on Wednesday after she asked them to sing a tone. Credit Chang W. Lee/The New York Times By  Corey Kilgannon Dec. 1, 2016 A walk through the bustling streets of Midtown Manhattan can be auditory anarchy, with intrusions from squealing bus brakes, roaring garbage trucks, whining ambulances and other noisy contributors. For Elena Kowalsky, the cacophony is music to the ears. “You really can make music of it, if you pay attention the right way,” said Ms. Kowalsky, 42, who has absolute pitch, commonly called perfect pitch, which is the rare ability to identify and name tones without having to use a keyboard for reference. And while Ms. Kowalsky, a classically trained pianist, might prefer some Bach, Sinatra or Led Zeppelin, she is also a fan of the unintended compositions by the city, offered up by the street-level smorgasbord of pitches. Those taxi horn blasts, subway screeches or jarring police-car whoops: She hears them as pure — or often out-of-tune — pitch tones. On Wednesday, she pointed to an M5 public bus heading down Fifth Avenue, its decelerating engine emitting a heavy exhale, which Ms. Kowalsky identified as a B on the piano that descended a short way down the scale to a G. Then an ambulance siren’s song wailed through the canyon of buildings, a barely noticeable background noise that Ms. Kowalsky regarded like an orchestra conductor, declaring it a glissando, or slide, from F sharp, up an octave, to a higher F sharp, and then trilling between G and B. Ms. Kowalsky, who grew up in Queens and lives in Lower Manhattan, said that when she was 2 she walked over to a neighbor’s piano and played a tune she had heard played on it a month earlier, in the same key. “My parents said, ‘We better get her lessons,’” recalled Ms. Kowalsky, who in middle school was told by a band teacher she had this innate ability. She studied ballet and piano privately and music theory at the Aaron Copland School of Music at Queens College. She now works at the Feinstein Institute for Medical Research , on Long Island, studying the genetic basis of absolute pitch. The work involves finding and testing people with the talent and collecting a DNA sample. Ms. Kowalsky helped create an app to test for absolute pitch. Ms. Kowalsky teaches classical piano and directs a small choir based in Harlem made up of women from Belgium and France. She also plays keyboard in Bustling Hedgerow , a Led Zeppelin cover band. She practices Sufi whirling, a twirling style of dance associated with Persian dervishes that involves extended stretches of vigorous spinning in a meditative trance. Ms. Kowalsky, who is training under Banafsheh Sayyad, a master of sacred dance, said her musical ability helped her focus while spinning. Before a twirling class on Wednesday, Ms. Kowalsky sat in a Midtown coffee shop and compared her listening ability to an average person’s recognition of colors. It is impossible to walk down the street and not assign note values to pitched sounds — be it a traffic officer’s whistle or an elevator’s arrival tone. Usually it is a note that shows up on a musical staff, or on a keyboard. Two women chatted nearby, and Ms. Kowalsky said that she heard the rise and fall of their voices “as musical notes on a page,” noting that a refrigerator motor nearby hummed in B. A window display at Saks Fifth Avenue featured a “Nutcracker”-themed display, which played an excerpt from the ballet that Ms. Kowalsky identified as being in B flat. The music was augmented by steady beeping in A flat — the warning signal of a Transportation Department truck backing up. “Completely dissonant,” she said. “But hey, why judge it?” She walked inside St. Patrick’s Cathedral, where worshipers sang a hymn along with the pipe organ, in F major, she said. “When I hear this, my hands are on the keyboard with the organist,” she said. “What the people are playing, I can see it in my mind. It almost feels like I’m playing with people when I hear them play.” Outside, an umbrella vendor trying to lure customers repeated a singsong, two-note chant, a narrow interval between G and the B above it. Many of the car horns were B notes, and Ms. Kowalsky joked that perhaps B was the median pitch of all the noises produced in the city, something of a karmic convergence of acoustic vibration. If so, then the furious driver trapped in gridlock on 49th Street would be contributing a sustained two-note chord of her car horn — a G with a B just above it. So would a tinny speaker outside a restaurant piping an instrumental version of “It’s Beginning to Look a Lot Like Christmas” in the key of G. In the Times Square subway station, Ms. Kowalsky paused near a man playing a saw with a violin bow — John Lennon’s “Imagine” in F major — and boarded an uptown No. 3 train. Before departing, it emitted the familiar descending two-note electronic bing-bong, which Ms. Kowalsky called “a funky E and C,” because of its shaky tuning. The express train’s steel wheels were whinnying in D and F, she said, with another tone above them. “That’s a nice B — clean,” she said, then hearing yet another unintended city sound in the symphony of the city. “With a C sharp under it.” Email character@nytimes.com  The Particulars  Name Elena Kowalsky  Age 42  Who She Is A classically trained pianist with perfect pitch who studies the genetic basis for the talent at a medical research institute on Long Island.  Where She’s From Lower Manhattan  Telling Detail She can walk around the city and identify a bus engine as a descending B or the wail of an ambulance as a glissando. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page MB 4 of the New York edition with the headline: City Noise? It’s Music to Her . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              