   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Weddings Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Shauna Woods, Alexander Smith Image Credit Dustin Waller Sept. 17, 2017 Shauna Elizabeth Woods and Alexander Michael Smith were married Sept. 16 at the University Club of Santa Barbara in California. Judge William B. Shubb, senior district judge of the United States District Court for the Eastern District of California, for whom the groom was a clerk, officiated. Ms. Woods, 29, is an associate in the Los Angeles office of Goodwin Procter, a Boston law firm, and was a law clerk for Chief Judge Phillips in 2015-16. She graduated with honors from the University of California, Santa Barbara, and received a law degree cum laude from Duke University. She is a daughter of Kathryn A. Woods and Daniel J. Woods of Santa Monica, Calif. The bride’s father is a partner in the Los Angeles law firm Musick, Peeler & Garrett. He was the lead lawyer in the 2010 federal lawsuit Log Cabin Republicans v. United States of America, which successfully challenged the constitutionality of the United States military’s “don’t ask, don’t tell” policy. Mr. Smith, 30, is an associate in the Los Angeles office of Jenner & Block, a Chicago law firm. He graduated with highest honors from the University of California, Berkeley, and received a law degree cum laude from Harvard. He is a son of Dr. Vivian Terkel and Dr. Robert M. Smith of San Diego. The groom’s mother, an internist who specialized in women’s health, retired from a branch of the Scripps Clinic in San Diego. His father, a pulmonologist, is the director of the Veterans Affairs hospital in San Diego and is a professor of medicine at the University of California, San Diego, School of Medicine. The couple connected for the first time on Christmas Day 2014, on the dating app Coffee Meets Bagel, and a few days later, the two had their first date at a gastro pub in Los Angeles. Correction :  A report last Sunday about the marriage of Shauna Woods and Alexander Smith included outdated information about the officiant. After the section had gone to press, Judge Willam B. Shubb, senior district judge of the United States District Court for the Eastern District of California, substituted for Chief Judge Virginia A. Phillips of the United States District Court for the Central District of California, because of an emergency. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page ST 14 of the New York edition with the headline: Shauna Woods,  Alexander Smith . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              