   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Weddings Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Ashley White-Stern, Jonathan Oliver Image Credit Michael Andrew Hernandez Oct. 16, 2016 Ashley Paige White-Stern, a daughter of Dr. Andrea E. Stern and the Rev. Dr. Ronald B. White of Boston, was married Oct. 15 to Jonathan Douglass Oliver, a son of Louisa S. Oliver and Judge Solomon Oliver Jr. of Cleveland Heights, Ohio. The groom’s father, the chief judge of Federal District Court for the Northern District of Ohio, officiated at the Manny Cantor Center of the Educational Alliance in New York, with the bride’s father, the senior pastor of the First Church of Roxbury, a Unitarian-Universalist church, leading Jewish elements of the wedding, including the seven blessings, the breaking of the glass, an invocation and the blessing of the wine. The couple also followed the African-American wedding tradition of jumping the broom. Ms. White-Stern, 34, is keeping her name. She is a third-year medical student at Columbia University College of Physicians and Surgeons in New York. She graduated from the University of Chicago and received a master’s in film studies from the University of California, Berkeley. Her father, an internist and a psychiatrist, retired as the director of the Martha Eliot Health Center in Boston. Her mother is a children’s psychiatrist at Carney Hospital in Boston, and has a practice in Brookline, Mass. The bride’s previous marriage ended in divorce. Mr. Oliver, 40, is a self-employed D.J. who is a host of a monthly party, I Love Vinyl, that was held most recently in the Williamsburg section of Brooklyn. He graduated from Amherst College. His mother, a social worker, retired as the executive director of Heights Parent Center, a social services and support program for new parents that was in Cleveland Heights. His father has his chambers in Cleveland. The couple met through Tinder in 2014. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page ST 16 of the New York edition with the headline: Ashley White-Stern,  Jonathan Oliver . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              