   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Politics Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Having Trouble Keeping Up With All the Trump News? Here Are the Must-Reads Image Credit Al Drago/The New York Times Compiled by  Justin Bank June 10, 2017 Worried that you missed an important political story this week? Catch up on a very busy week of news from the Trump Administration . Make sure you get the most important news, delivered directly to your inbox, by signing up for our Morning Briefing newsletter . Monday, June 5 • White House policy. President Trump endorsed a proposal on Monday to privatize air traffic control , seizing on a decades-old idea as proof that he is advancing the ambitious infrastructure rebuilding plan he promised during his campaign but is still months from delivering. The Occupational Safety and Health Administration has been working under the Trump administration to relax efforts on worker safety , giving a bigger voice to businesses. _____ • Travel ban. • President Trump attacked the Justice Department and the courts on Monday, lamenting “the watered down, politically correct version” of the executive order he issued in March to limit travel from six predominantly Muslim countries. His comments could imperil efforts to reinstate the order, which was blocked by courts, and they reflect his growing frustration with Attorney General Jeff Sessions . _____ • Leak case. Image An Instagram image of Reality Leigh Winner, 25, who was charged with sending classified material to a news website. Credit via Reuters An intelligence contractor has been charged with sending a classified report about Russia’s interference in the 2016 election to the news media, the first criminal leak case under the Trump administration. Reality Leigh Winner, the contractor accused of the leak, was partly undone by a trail of clues on social media. _____ Tuesday, June 6 • Entering a Mideast feud. Egypt, Saudi Arabia and three other Arab nations severed ties with Qatar on Monday, complicating American efforts to confront the Islamic State. President Trump took credit on Tuesday for the move, rattling his national security staff by upending a crucial strategic relationship. Qatar has long been accused of funneling money to radical groups in Arab nations, but it is also home to two major American command posts. _____ • Distrust in Washington. When he was the F.B.I. director, James Comey told Attorney General Jeff Sessions that he didn’t want to be left alone with President Trump , officials told us on Tuesday. A fear that Mr. Comey confirmed at his hearing on Thursday. In a video, one of our reporters in Washington discusses the revelation. Separately, our reporters learned that Mr. Sessions offered to resign in recent weeks, telling the president he needed freedom to do his job. Mr. Trump turned down the offer. _____ Wednesday, June 7 • New pick for F.B.I. director is named. President Trump announced on Wednesday that he had selected Christopher Wray , a former federal prosecutor who is a partner at a Washington law firm, to lead the agency. Mr. Wray was the government’s top criminal prosecutor in 2004 when the F.B.I. director, Robert S. Mueller III, and the deputy attorney general, James Comey, threatened to quit the Bush administration over a controversial surveillance program. He offered to join their protest. _____ Thursday, June 8 • Comey’s testimony. Image Credit Doug Mills/The New York Times During testimony before the Senate Intelligence Committee on Thursday, James Comey, the former F.B.I. director, disputed the White House’s explanations for his firing, calling them “lies, plain and simple.” He offered a plain-spoken assessment of President Trump, raising the question of whether the president tried to obstruct justice by discussing the F.B.I. inquiry of Michael Flynn, the former national security adviser. Mr. Trump’s personal lawyer, Marc Kasowitz, denied any obstruction. “The president never, in form or substance, directed or suggested that Mr. Comey stop investigating anyone,” he said. We have video highlights and four takeaways , as well as video of the full three-hour testimony and a transcript . Our reporters analyzed and annotated his planned remarks, the early publication of which reflected Mr. Comey’s savvy as a Washington veteran , our reporters write. The “cloud” that the president had urged Mr. Comey to lift from his administration only grew darker on Thursday, our chief White House correspondent writes . _____ • Elsewhere in Washington The House passed a bill on Thursday to undo some financial regulations put in place by the 2010 Dodd-Frank Act, but the measure faces a tougher road in the Senate. _____ Friday, June 9 • Comey fallout. President Trump on Friday accused James Comey of lying under oath to Congress in testimony that the president dismissed as a politically motivated proceeding. Mr. Trump also asserted that Mr. Comey’s comments on Thursday, in which the former F.B.I. director implied that the president fired him for pressing forward with the Russia investigation, had failed to prove any collusion between the Trump campaign and Moscow or any obstruction of justice. On Capitol Hill, the reactions to Mr. Comey’s testimony were split along party lines . To Republicans, President Trump’s overtures to Mr. Comey were the stumbles of a political novice. To Democrats, they were a severe ethical breach. _____ Make sure you get the most important news, delivered directly to your inbox, by signing up for our Morning Briefing newsletter . Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              