   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Sunday Review Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Opinion Supported by Letters Choosing When and How to Die June 3, 2017 Image Credit Leslye Davis/The New York Times To the Editor: Re “ The Death and Life of John Shields ” (“The End” series, front page, May 28), about a Canadian man with an incurable disease who orchestrated his final days before a physician-assisted death: John Shields gave himself and his loved ones an amazing gift by planning and attending his own wake. He gave his friends and family an opportunity to celebrate life and strengthen bonds in the face of his death. I was struck by how his wife and loved ones honored his choices and courageously accompanied him through the end of his life. American culture teaches us to avoid the topic of death, so most Americans are deeply uncomfortable discussing death and dying. But death is a precious part of life, and Mr. Shields’s story shows us that when we embrace death, grace and peace — as well as the difficult and painful parts — can be ours to experience. SARAH FARR SILVER SPRING, MD. The writer is an end-of-life doula. To the Editor: I read about John Shields’s last days with particular interest because my husband, Norman Lindsey, passed away in a hospice on May 19. The words of Mr. Shields’s doctor, Stefanie Green, were particularly poignant for me. She said, “Give people good information and let them do what they think is best for their family.” We did not have that choice. I feel nothing but resentment and anger toward those in the Connecticut Legislature who think it their right to prevent us from choosing how to end our life once told that we have a terminal illness with less than six months to live. Norman had lung disease, and I watched this lovely, vigorous, intelligent man lose his ability to walk even a few steps, use the bathroom, breathe without the aid of oxygen, read, eat, drink and speak. As a woman cited in your article asked, “Who owns my life?” ANITA LINDSEY RIDGEFIELD, CONN. To the Editor: Many readers will be moved by the poignant story of John Shields, even as it numbs us to the Orwellian language of euthanasia. The physician who administered a lethal drug to her patient believes that this is how civilization “treats its vulnerable” and is a “mark of our humanity.” Patients are now judged “qualified” for mercy killing as part of “continuum of care of helping people.” This so-called continuum has led, in the Netherlands, to the euthanizing of 66 psychiatric patients from 2011 to 2014, despite disagreement among independent reviewers in nearly one-quarter of cases. In 2015, the World Medical Association reaffirmed its position: “Physician-assisted suicide, like euthanasia, is unethical and must be condemned by the medical profession. … However, the right to decline medical treatment is a basic right of the patient and the physician does not act unethically even if respecting such a wish results in the death of the patient.” Let us hope that American physicians avoid the slippery slope upon which Canadian and European doctors now find themselves. RONALD W. PIES LEXINGTON, MASS. The writer is a psychiatrist and medical ethicist affiliated with SUNY Upstate Medical University and Tufts University. To the Editor: As I read about John Shields’s decision to end his life by physician-assisted suicide, I was reminded of the very similar and equally well planned and beautiful death of a beloved family member of ours named Lucy. After a life well lived, Lucy, an elderly female in failing health, was injected with a lethal dose of drugs. The drugs were administered by a kind and sensitive doctor, in the familiar surroundings of Lucy’s own home, while she was held and comforted by those who loved her. Her passing was gentle and peaceful, and she deserved no less. Lucy was our beloved golden retriever. In most of America, human beings are denied the option to choose the type of death with compassion and dignity that we routinely afford our pets. Your sensitive rendering of the journey John Shields chose will, I hope, show us another, and better, way. LINDA ACHESON POOL PITTSBURGH To the Editor: “Birth and death, deliveries in and out — I find it very transferable,” Dr. Stefanie Green explained in your article. She chose to specialize in death, rather than birth, because “she needed a better life-work balance than the erratic delivery of babies allowed.” Some may view Dr. Green’s offhand description of hastening a person’s death as, in her words, “a mark of our humanity.” Others will experience a sense of alarm at turning death into another routine clinical procedure, to be scheduled around a doctor’s vacation. As we read of how the doctor pressed the plunger on a series of syringes until the person was no more, we might ask ourselves if this is a road we want our doctors and our society to start down. Seriously ill people may feel that they are a bother to others and subtly pressured to get out of the way. ALAN B. ASTROW, BROOKLYN The writer is chief of hematology/medical oncology at NewYork-Presbyterian Brooklyn Methodist Hospital and a professor of clinical medicine at Weill Cornell Medical College. To the Editor: Tormented by an incurable disease, John Shields chose death with grace and dignity. In Canada assisted suicide is legal; in the United States only a few states allow it. The experience of those states shows no evidence of misuse or abuse. Consider a person with a terminal diagnosis coupled with the probability of a long, painful and possibly bankrupting death (with subsequent impoverishment of the survivors). The prospect of having the choice to end one’s own physical and mental suffering would be a great comfort even if one never opts to exercise that choice. John Shields said: “No matter how I looked at my life from this moment on, I see personal, physical unbearable suffering. I don’t want to suffer anymore.” The Maine Legislature just considered and rejected an aid-in-dying law. Maine shares a long border with Canada. Perhaps some of that Canadian compassion and understanding can filter across the border and cause Maine to join the ranks of states accepting the concept of death with dignity. LEN FREEMAN, PORTLAND, ME. To the Editor: “The Death and Life of John Shields” was a compelling portrait of the very real fragility and beauty that is often revealed at the end of life. As a specialist in hospice and palliative medicine, I have had the privilege to bear witness to daily reminders of what courage and love in the face of terminal illness look like. I was disheartened, however, with the adulatory light shed on the act of a physician administering lethal injections. As a physician dedicated to improving my patient’s quality of life, such an act is antithetical to hospice care, and yet there was no clear delineation made in the story. Furthermore, the lack of insight from true palliative care experts to provide the counterpoint to euthanasia was truly disappointing. The growing discussion of dying well is a welcome and needed one. It also needs to be balanced and well informed. BRENDAN FLYNN WINCHESTER, VA. The writer is chief medical officer at Blue Ridge Hospice. To the Editor: Your tearjerking, multipage exploitation of John Shields’s last days and your unabashed promotion of euthanasia are not in the tradition of “All the News That’s Fit to Print” and are not appreciated. May Mr. Shields, with whose family I commiserate, rest in peace. ROBERT J. RICHARDSON ACTON, MASS. To the Editor: As I read your wonderful story about this remarkable man and his remarkable death, my eyes were watering throughout. I was mesmerized by his careful planning and the inevitable outcome. If only this kind of death were available to everyone, maybe we would live our lives more carefully and thoughtfully. Thank you for devoting so much time and space to a well-told story that will affect us all. KATHERINE MCEWEN, CHICAGO A version of this article appears in print on , on Page SR 8 of the New York edition with the headline: Choosing When and How to Die . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              