   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Book Review Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by David Greenberg’s ‘Republic of Spin’ Image Warren Harding, front row right, and Albert Lasker, adman and adviser, center. Credit Library of Congress Buy Book ▾ Amazon Local Booksellers Barnes and Noble When you purchase an independently reviewed book through our site, we earn an affiliate commission. By  Michael Beschloss Jan. 20, 2016 When George Washington was president, our forebears did not wonder what spurred his occasional ghostwriter, Alexander Hamilton, to make a particular argument in the general’s 1796 farewell address. Nor did many voters in 1860 try to deconstruct why Abraham Lincoln’s propagandists chose to present him as a backwoods rail-splitter, which he had not been for a very long time, instead of the well-heeled corporate lawyer he had, thanks to hard work and talent, become. When presidents or candidates speak in public nowadays, however, voters focus on the makeup artists and sorcerers lurking behind the curtain, murmuring stage directions and working the teleprompter. Americans have become conditioned to speculate not only about the content of what politicians tell them but, as much or more, also about their motives and artifice — sometimes to the point of ridiculous paranoia. For example, when George W. Bush debated John Kerry in 2004, some viewers insisted that a visible bulge in the back of the president’s suit must be some kind of electronic device allowing Bush’s strategists to give him advice on what to say. “Republic of Spin,” David Greenberg’s sound, judicious and dispassionate volume, which draws on primary sources as well as the existing academic literature, shows, from the standpoint of history, why being skeptical about how presidents try to sell themselves is, mainly, a good thing. Citing the lessons and interventions of Hannah ­Arendt, Vance Packard and others, including the adman Rosser Reeves, Greenberg, a Rutgers professor of history, journalism and media studies, shows us the arc, from William McKinley campaigning from his front porch to the melodramatic Theodore Roosevelt to the present. Noting that the Progressive epoch saw the arrival of “self-consciously professional firms whose express purpose was to help clients burnish their images and spread their messages,” the author describes how Woodrow Wilson turned the tables “on those who might deem him unduly aristocratic” by singling out Theodore Roosevelt as the elitist, implying that the latter “initiated policies and then simply sold them to a star-struck, quiescent public.” As Greenberg writes, the awkward Wilson “considered mass communications — ­movies, photography, phonograph recordings — artificial and undignified” and damaged himself by avoiding “such elementary practices as giving ­interviews.” Warren Harding was the first president to use anything close to a full-time speechwriter ­— ­Judson Welliver, who was called his “literary clerk.” The existence of this post, Greenberg writes, began to “feed anxieties about whether the voters were really getting the men they thought they were electing.” Thanks to radio, the reach of the presidential voice was expanding fast. In 1924, Bruce Bliven reported in The New Republic that Calvin Coolidge’s addresses “have been heard by at least 10 times as many people as have heard any other man who ever lived.” No longer were presidential statements merely lines of type on a page. Greenberg relates how Mildred Goldstein of Joliet, Ill., wrote to Franklin Roosevelt after his first radio fireside chat, in 1933, that to her, presidents had once been merely “a picture to look at. But you are real. I know your voice, what you are trying to do.” The author describes Roosevelt’s exploitation of polls to gauge public reactions to New Deal innovations and Republican broadsides, and how Harry Truman, now viewed as a tower of authenticity, was coached by a radio executive, who showed him how to pause “for dramatic effect.” Charles de Gaulle believed that a leader derived power by preserving his majesty through distance from the public. Greenberg recounts how, by contrast, President Eisenhower offered television viewers a peek at the life of a president in 1954 by allowing the cabinet room to be televised, and how John Kennedy opened the door further by letting himself be filmed in the Oval Office for a behind-the-scenes television documentary on the forced integration of the University of Alabama in 1963. The author notes that in later years, as chief executives have tried to court favor by satisfying the public appetite for personal details about themselves, they have also taken the risk of becoming less respected: “The small screen could undermine presidential power as well as augment it. The encroachment of cameras and microphones . . . into the once-private chambers of government leaders served to diminish the president’s majesty.” The core of Greenberg’s fine, nuanced book is how the language of presidents and those who want the job has ­transformed into the intensely premeditated communications of our time. Saying so more frankly than his predecessors probably would have, Richard Nixon argued in his memoirs that for modern presidents, “concern for image must rank with concern for substance.” Greenberg describes how Nixon’s “relentless P.R. efforts served to strengthen his reputation for deviousness and insincerity” and says that “to counter that image, he spun even more furiously, striking a pose of authenticity and protesting that he paid image-making no mind at all.” Contrary to the pundit consensus of the time, the author believes that Ronald Reagan, in his much celebrated role as a communicator, was no innovator but instead “a master of methods that a long string of forebears had incrementally ­developed.” William Safire wrote that the Old English word “spin” (“to whirl”) had come, by the 1950s, also to mean “to deceive.” He noted that it “entered the political lexicon” in 1984, in a New York Times editorial that said advisers to that year’s ­major-party candidates, Reagan and Walter Mondale, “won’t be just press agents trying to impart a favorable spin to a routine release. They’ll be the Spin Doctors . . . and they’ll be playing for very high stakes.” In our own time, one problem with using the term “spin” incautiously is that so many people consider it to include the kind of deliberate lying we heard, for example, during the Iraq War, from Saddam Hussein’s spokesman “Baghdad Bob,” who denied the presence of American bombs that could be seen exploding. (In fact, when Baghdad Bob was captured, United Press International referred to him as a “spin doctor.”) If Americans presume that politicians at the presidential level routinely practice spin, which they presume to include flat-out lying, is it any wonder that so many people loathe politics? Greenberg finished writing this volume before the 2016 presidential campaign revved up, but his treatment of how our political machinery became so en­­crusted with deception shows why Americans have become fed up with politicians who will not open their mouths without a focus group’s foreguidance. A close reading of this book should also, however, have the effect of cautioning voters not to let their disgust at such fakery push them to the other extreme, searching, above all, for the candidate who exhibits the most spontaneous persona. Huey Long and George Wallace were spontaneous too. Michael Beschloss, a presidential historian and contributing columnist for The Times, is writing a history of presidential leadership in wartime.  A version of this article appears in print on , on Page 13 of the Sunday Book Review with the headline: Giving Spin a Bad Name . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              