   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Weddings Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by This Week’s Wedding Announcements All of the weddings right here on one handy page for you. April 6, 2018 Lauren Attaway, Rogelio Thomas Jr. Image Credit Mandela Gregoire Lauren Jade Attaway and Rogelio Isaac Thomas Jr. were married April 6 at University United Methodist Church in Indianapolis. The Rev. Dr. L. Wayne Smith, a pastor at the church, performed the ceremony. Ms. Attaway-Thomas, 31, works in Brooklyn as an associate with Fortress Fiduciary, an accounting and financial planning company based in New Haven. She graduated from Columbia College Chicago. The bride is a daughter of Marcia L. Jackson and Robert E. Jackson of Indianapolis. Her father works at the University of Indianapolis as a lead custodian in the facilities department, where he manages and trains other employees. Her mother retired as a clinical researcher at Indiana University School of Medicine, where she researched endocrinology. Mr. Thomas, 28, works in Brooklyn as the administrator of Hands on Health Associates, a substance abuse and behavioral health treatment provider, for which his father, Dr. Rogelio I. Thomas, is a founder. The groom graduated from Boston College and received an M.B.A. from Yale. Mr. Thomas is the son of Dr. Nanette L. Alexander-Thomas and Dr. Thomas of Brooklyn. His mother is a rheumatologist and the medical director of ambulatory care at Brookdale University Hospital Medical Center in Brooklyn and One Brooklyn Health. His father is an internist and addiction specialist, and is the chief executive and founder of Special Care Medical Associates, a provider of physician services in Brooklyn. The couple met at a bar in Manhattan in 2012. Anne Blackstock-Bernstein, Kyle Warren Image Anne Blackstock-Bernstein and Kyle Michaelson Warren were married April 7 at the Cree Estate in Cathedral City, Calif. The playwright Tony Kushner, a Universal Life minister, officiated. Until 2014, the groom worked as Mr. Kushner’s assistant in New York. Ms. Blackstock-Bernstein, 31, is pursuing a doctorate in human development and psychology in the department of education at the University of California, Los Angeles, from which she received a master’s degree in the same subject. Until 2012, she worked as a research assistant at Weill Cornell Medical College in New York. She graduated magna cum laude from Brandeis with a degree in psychology, sociology and education studies. She is the daughter of Ann Blackstock and Joel Bernstein of New York. The bride’s father is an actor now appearing as Warren Boyd, the concertmaster in “Mozart in the Jungle,” a comedy-drama Amazon web series filmed in the New York area. Her mother is a freelance photographer based in New York. Mr. Warren, also 31, is a television writer/producer currently for “Lethal Weapon,” a Fox comedy-drama series based on the movie by the same name. He graduated summa cum laude from Northwestern with a degree in theater and a certificate in creative writing for the media. He is a son of Sandi R. Michaelson and Jeffrey C Warren, both of Fairfield, Conn. The groom’s mother is the vice president for foundation partnerships at Save the Children, a global humanitarian organization for children, in Fairfield. His father is an actuarial consultant based in Fairfield. A mutual friend introduced the couple at a party in New York in 2010. Neither Ms. Blackstock-Bernstein nor Mr. Warren, however, recalled meeting the summer of 1999 at the Center for Talented Youth at Mount Holyoke College, where they were part of a 12-person class Model U.N. and Advanced Geography. Once they made the connection, Ms. Blackstock-Bernstein dug out the summer yearbook, and there in black and white was a photocopied photo of the two of them sitting on the same bench one student apart. The photo was more recently featured on their save the date card. Constance Carter, Gordon Dale Image Credit Katherine Kendall Constance Thérèse Carter and Gordon Todd Dale were married April 7 at the Sulgrave Club in Washington. The Rev. Stuart A. Kenworthy, an Episcopal priest and the interim vicar of the Washington National Cathedral, performed the ceremony. The bride, 60, is a sales associate with Washington Fine Properties in Washington. She graduated from Northwestern. She is a daughter of Rosemary Casey Carter and Charles Carroll Carter of Washington. The bride’s father is the former editor and publisher of Mass Transit Magazine, which he founded in 1974 and sold in 1991. The bride is a direct descendant of Charles Carroll of Carrollton, the longest living signer of the Declaration of Independence, and Daniel Carroll, a signer of the Constitution. Mr. Dale, 66 is a wealth management adviser for UBS in Washington. He is the son of Elizabeth Todd Healy of Cold Spring, N.Y., and the late Chalmers Dale of Tuxedo Park, N.Y The groom’s father was a metallurgist at Ugine Kuhlmann U.S.A. in New York. The bride’s marriage ended in divorce. The groom was a widower. The couple, who had been social friends in Washington since 1999, began dating there in December 2012. Grace Chapin, Jason James Image Credit Shannon Shin Grace Hollingsworth Chapin and Jason Elliott James were married April 7 at Bond Chapel at the University of Chicago. Jonathan D. Williams, who was ordained by the Church of Spiritual Humanism, officiated, with Brian Droste leading the ceremony. Mrs. James, 29, is a deputy director of undergraduate admissions at the University of Chicago. She graduated with general honors from the University of Chicago, and received a master’s degree in higher education administration from Harvard. She is a daughter of Susan Svacek Chapin and Paul H. Chapin of Spokane, Wash. Her father recently retired as the senior vice president of People to People Student Travel Programs in Spokane. Her mother, a registered nurse, is an infection prevention specialist at Providence Sacred Heart Medical Center, also in Spokane. She is the president of the board of directors of Spokane Public Schools. Mr. James, 34, works in Chicago as an attorney-adviser for the Illinois Pollution Control Board, which adopts environmental regulations and adjudicates contested pollution-related cases for the state. He graduated from Notre Dame and received a law degree from the University of Virginia. He also earned a master’s degree in public policy studies from the University of Chicago. He is a son of Jeanne M. James and William C. James of Vienna, Va. The groom’s mother is a preschool teacher at Wesley Preschool in Vienna. His father is the deputy assistant secretary in the office of information and technology at the Department of Veterans Affairs in Washington. The couple were introduced through OkCupid during the summer of 2013 while Ms. Chapin was in China for work for several weeks. They had their first conversation via Skype, and made up for lost time three weeks later with an all-day date in the Logan Square area of Chicago. Susan Edwards, Pete Strom Image Credit Forest Clonts Studio Susan Rawls Edwards and Joseph Preston Strom were married April 7 at their home in Columbia, S.C. The Rev. Amos Disasa, a Presbyterian minister, officiated. The bride, 51, is a divorce lawyer and a partner of Gaffney Lewis & Edwards, a firm in Columbia. She graduated from the University of South Carolina and received a law degree from the Campbell University’s School of Law. She is a daughter of Nancy P. Monteith of Charlotte and James E. Rawls of Leesville, S.C. The bride’s father is the owner of Rawls Auto Auction in Leesville. Her mother owns Reynolds Fence and Guard Rail, a highway construction company in Charlotte. The groom, 58, who goes by the name Pete, is a plaintiff and criminal defense lawyer in private practice in Columbia. He previously worked in Columbia as a United States attorney for the state of South Carolina. He is the son of the late Grace Neal Strom and the late Joseph Preston Strom, who lived in Columbia. The groom’s father, who worked in Columbia, served as chief of the South Carolina Law Enforcement Division from 1956 until is death in 1987. The bride’s first marriage ended in divorce, as did the groom’s. The couple met through legal circles in Columbia in 2012. Candida Moss, Justin Foa Image Credit Michael Priest Candida Rebecca Moss and Conrad Justin Foa were married April 4. Judge Lyle Frank of the Criminal Court of the City of New York, officiated at the couple’s home in New York. Ms. Moss, 39, is a professor of theology at the University of Birmingham in England. She is an author, with Joel S. Baden, of “Bible Nation: The United States of Hobby Lobby.” She graduated from the University of Oxford and received a master’s degree in biblical studies from Yale, from which she also received a Ph.D. in religious studies. She is a daughter of Robert J. Moss of Albany and the late Katrina E. Wise. Her father is an author whose books include “Conscious Dreaming: A Spiritual Path for Everyday Life.” Her mother was an interior designer in London. She is a stepdaughter of Marcia Moss and Peter Wise. Mr. Foa, 45, who goes by the name Justin, works in New York as the chief executive and president of the Foa & Son Corporation, an insurance brokerage company, for which his father, Conrad M. Foa, is the chairman. The groom graduated from the University of Pennsylvania. He is also a son of the late Linda R. Foa of New York. The groom’s mother was a marketing executive for the Architects & Design Building, which houses 35 showrooms for interior design companies in New York. The bride’s previous marriage ended in divorce, as did the groom’s. The couple met in 2015 through OkCupid. Alicia Ortega, Debraj Mukherjee Image Alicia Nicole Ortega and Dr. Debraj Mukherjee were married April 6 at San Francisco City Hall. Carlos Ortega, the bride’s brother who was ordained through American Marriage Ministries for the event, officiated. Ms. Ortega, 27, is a clinical trial regulatory coordinator for Cedars-Sinai Medical Center in Los Angeles. She graduated from Cornell and received a master’s degree in applied biostatistics and epidemiology from the University of Southern California. She is a daughter of Christine M. Ortega and Chris A. Ortega of Santa Fe, N.M. The bride’s father retired as a civil engineer for the City of Santa Fe. He is a commercial pilot for Armstrong Consultants in Albuquerque. The bride’s mother is a financial analyst in Santa Fe for the State of New Mexico at the Public Employees Retirement Association. Dr. Mukherjee, 35, is a neurosurgeon at the University of Pittsburgh Medical Center. He graduated from Dartmouth and received a medical degree from Johns Hopkins. He is a son of Kalpana Mukherjee and Mahitosh Mukherjee of Los Angeles. The groom’s mother is an associate nurse at Sakura Intermediate Care Facility in Los Angeles. The groom’s father retired as a structural engineer and owner of Diversified Engineering in Hammond, Ind. The couple met in 2012 at the Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, where the bride was a research analyst and the groom a neurosurgical resident. Priya Prasad, James Bowe III Image The couple met while working together in interest rate sales at Morgan Stanley in New York in 2011. Credit Patrick Randak Priya Kim Prasad and James Francis Bowe III were married April 7 at St. Patrick’s Old Cathedral in New York. Msgr. Donald Sakano performed the ceremony. The bride, 30, works in interest rates in New York City for Citadel Securities. She graduated from Yale and received an M.B.A. from Columbia. She is also a chartered financial analyst. She is the daughter of InSook Y. Prasad and Bipin K. Prasad of New York. The bride’s father is a self-employed software engineer in New York. The groom, 29, was until last month a treasury bond trader in New York for Nomura Securities. He graduated from Colby College. He is a son of Ambassador Michele B. Bowe and Mr. Bowe Jr. of Chevy Chase, Md. The groom’s mother is the president of the Holy Family Hospital of Bethlehem Foundation; she is also the Order of Malta’s ambassador to Palestine. His father is a partner in King & Spalding, a law firm in Washington. The couple met while working together in interest rate sales at Morgan Stanley in New York in 2011. Tiffany Peng, Jason Hwa Image Credit Ting-Yi McCluskey, DP Studio Dr. Tiffany Peng and Jason Ren-Tse Hwa were married April 7 at the Bronx Zoo. Natalie A. Adler, a friend of the couple who became ordained through American Marriage Ministries for the event, officiated. Dr. Peng, 28, is a resident physician in otolaryngology at the NewYork-Presbyterian Hospital of Columbia and Cornell. She graduated from Rutgers and received a medical degree from Weill Cornell. She is a daughter of Eileen R. Peng and Dr. Dennis W. Peng of Edison, N.J. The bride’s father is a dental supervisor at Betances Health Center in Manhattan. Her mother is the director of pharmaceutics services and the pharmacy manager at the Regional Cancer Care Associates Pharmacy in East Brunswick, N.J. Mr. Hwa, 29, is a senior data science manager for Orchard Platform, a finance tech start-up in Manhattan. He graduated from Carnegie Mellon University, from which he also received a master’s degree in statistical practice. He is a son of Hsiu-Chin C. Hwa and Henry H. Hwa from Taiwan. The groom’s father is a chemical engineer in Fuzhou, China, at Fujian Shen Yuan New Material Limited, a company that produces fabrics for textile manufacturers. The couple met in April 2016 through OkCupid. Lindsey Pearl, Leah Rubin-Cadrain Image Credit Katie Edwards Lindsey Pearl Weinstein and Leah Aviva Rubin-Cadrain were married April 7 at Caravan Outpost, an Airstream trailer hotel in Ojai, Calif. Cantor Julia R. Cadrain, a sister of Ms. Rubin-Cadrain, officiated, with Elana Arian, the cantor’s wife, participating. Ms. Weinstein (left), 37, who goes by the surname Pearl, is a marketing lead for original programming at Apple Music in Los Angeles. She graduated from N.Y.U. She is a daughter of Dr. Debra Fischer Weinstein and Mark Weinstein, both of Island Park, N.Y. Her father works as a jet pilot at Ventura Air Services, a private charter company based in Farmingdale, N.Y. He retired as a dentist from a private practice he ran with Ms. Weinstein’s mother in Island Park. Her mother, who still works as a dentist there, is now affiliated with Great Expressions Dental Centers, a network of dental care providers. Ms. Rubin-Cadrain, 32, is a creative strategy lead at Snapchat in Los Angeles, a multimedia messaging app. She graduated from Yale. She is a daughter of Diane L. Cadrain and Joseph Rubin of West Hartford, Conn. Her father is an associate attorney general at the Office of the Attorney General in Hartford. He is on the board of the Unitarian Society of Hartford in Connecticut, of which he is the president-elect. Her mother, a fiber artist, is on the council of Connecticut Women Artists in Vernon, Conn. Until 2015 she was a freelance legal writer and researcher based in West Hartford. Ms. Pearl and Ms. Rubin-Cadraine had lived less than a mile apart in Brooklyn, frequented the same coffee shops and walked around Prospect Park on weekends. They were introduced, however, through OkCupid in 2013, and finally met over drinks at Buttermilk Bar in South Park Slope, Brooklyn. Faith Spencer, James Armstrong Image Credit Anne Jervey Rhett Faith Dana Spencer and James Warren Armstrong were married April 7 at Madison Avenue Presbyterian Church in New York. The Rev. Beverly A. Barlett, a Presbyterian minister, performed the ceremony, a portion of which was held in the Dana Chapel, named for the bride’s maternal great-grandmother, the late Alice Abigail Dana. Mrs. Armstrong, 27, is a substitute elementary schoolteacher in the Berkeley-Charleston South Carolina County School System. She graduated from Sewanee: the University of the South and received a master’s degree in elementary education from the College of Charleston. She is the daughter of Alice D. Spencer and Lee B. Spencer Jr. of New York. The bride’s father retired as the executive vice president and the general counsel of the Prudential Securities Group in New York. He was previously a partner in Gibson, Dunn & Crutcher, a law firm in New York, and the director of the Division of Corporation Finance at the Securities and Exchange Commission in Washington. Her mother is on the board of the Shelburne Museum in Shelburne, Vt. Mr. Armstrong, 29, is a branch manager with the Fairway Independent Mortgage Group in Mount Pleasant, S.C. He graduated from the University of South Carolina. He is the son of June Darnell Kemp of Bamburg, S.C., and Scott P. Armstrong of Cairo, Ill. The groom is also the stepson of Robert W. Kemp. The groom’s mother is an administrator at Orangeburg Preparatory School in Orangeburg, S.C. His father retired after a career in the United States Air Force. He was last stationed at Dobbins Air Force Base in Marietta Ga., and achieved the rank of chief master sergeant. The groom’s stepfather is a retired supervisor at the Delavan Corporation, a manufacturer in Bamburg. The couple met through a mutual friend at a rooftop bar in Charleston in 2015. Anna Ward, Daniel Frendl Image Credit Sam Kenary Dr. Anna Marie Ward and Dr. Daniel Mark Frendl were married April 7 at the Paradise Valley Country Club in Paradise Valley, Ariz. Lawrence F. Winthrop, a judge on the Arizona Court of Appeals, officiated. The bride, 32, is an instructor in anesthesia at Harvard Medical School and a practicing anesthesiologist at Massachusetts General Hospital in Boston. She graduated from the University of California, Berkeley and received a medical degree from the University of Arizona College of Medicine, Phoenix. She is the daughter of Pamela Thomas Ward and Dr. John Alfred Dudley Ward of Paradise Valley. The bride’s father retired as a plastic surgeon in private practice in Scottsdale, Ariz. Her mother is a retired business manager, also in Scottsdale. The groom, 31, is a resident in the Harvard Urologic Surgery Residency Program at the Massachusetts General Hospital. He graduated from Duke and received a medical degree and a doctor of philosophy from the University of Massachusetts. He is a son of Dr. Gyongyi Szabo and Dr. Gyorgy Frendl of Southborough, Mass. The groom’s mother, a gastroenterologist, is a professor of medicine at the University of Massachusetts Medical School and the former president of the American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases. His father is an associate professor of anesthesia and critical care at Harvard Medical School. He is also an attending physician at Brigham and Women’s Hospital. The couple met in the pediatric operating room at Massachusetts General Hospital in the summer of 2016. The groom was rotating on pediatric surgery and the bride on pediatric anesthesia. Rebecca Stump, Justin Werner II Image Credit Lovebird Studio Rebecca Marie Stump and Justin Clifford Werner II were married April 7 at Hotel on North in Pittsfield, Mass. Paul Khuri-Yakub, a friend of the couple, received permission from the State of Massachusetts to officiate. Mrs. Werner, 30, is the director of membership at PEN America, an organization in Manhattan that works to advance literature, defend free expression and foster international literary fellowship. She graduated with two bachelor’s degrees from Marymount Manhattan College, one in political science and the other in theater. She is a daughter of Elizabeth Isley Stump and Kevin S. Stump of Kutztown, Pa. The bride’s father is a biology teacher at Boyertown Area Senior High School in Boyertown, Pa. He is also a Coast Guard veteran, last stationed at the Coast Guard Station at Cape Cod Canal in Sandwich, Mass, where he achieved the rank of machinery technician second class. Her mother is a second-grade teacher at Kutztown Elementary School, and an adjunct professor of early childhood education at Cedar Crest College in Allentown, Pa. Mr. Werner, who is also 30 and works in Manhattan, is the founder of Stratagem Artists, where he serves as an agent for opera singers. He graduated from Boston University and received an artist diploma in opera performance from Queens College. He is the son of Ann-Marie Werner and Justin C. Werner of Neponsit, Queens. The groom’s mother, who retired as an officer from the treasury money market department at Chemical Bank, is currently the archivist for Poly Prep Country Day School in Brooklyn. His father is a retired captain of the New York Fire Department. He was last stationed at Ladder 147 in Brooklyn. The couple met on a blind date in Manhattan in April 2011. Eric Chow, Christopher Chambers Image Credit Susannah Thornton Dr. Eric James Chow and Christopher Ryan Chambers were married April 7 at the Four Seasons Resort Hualalai in Kailua-Kona, Hawaii. Dr. Su N. Aung, a Universal Life minister and a friend of the couple, officiated. Dr. Chow (left), 33, is a chief resident at Hasbro Children’s Hospital, a teaching affiliate of Brown University in Providence, R.I., where he was trained in internal medicine and pediatrics. He graduated with two bachelor’s degrees, one in biological sciences and the other in international relations, with honors, and a master’s degree in biological sciences from Stanford. He also has both a medical degree and a master’s in public health from Eastern Virginia Medical School in Norfolk, Va. In July, he is to join the Epidemic Intelligence Service at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, which is based in Atlanta. He is a son of Julia L. Chow and Marvin Chow of La Cañada, Calif. His mother retired as a pharmacist at Queen of the Valley Hospital in West Covina, Calif. His father retired as the pharmacy manager at the City of Hope National Medical Center in Duarte, Calif. Mr. Chambers, 28, is a master diver at the New England Aquarium in Boston and oversees the care of the Giant Ocean Tank. His job there previously included rescuing and rehabilitating stranded sea turtles. He graduated from University of New Hampshire. He is the son of Joan P. Chambers and Paul B. Chambers of Saratoga Springs, N.Y. His mother retired as a school psychologist from South Glens Falls High School in Glens Falls, N.Y. His father is retired as a supervisor at St. Peter’s Hospital in Albany. The couple met on OkCupid in October 2013. Daniela Suarez, Sam Schatz Daniela M. Adams Suarez and Sam Schatz were married April 7 at the Marigny Opera House in New Orleans. John Adams, a Universal Life minister, officiated. The bride, 30, is an event coordinator at Rolex in New York. She graduated from the Universidad Tecmilenio Villahermosa, Mexico. She is a daughter of Elvira Suarez of Sunnyside, Queens. The bride’s mother retired as an owner and the manager of Addonetti’s, a catering company in Villahermosa. The groom, 34, is a managing director overseeing North American business development for AeroFarms, a controlled agricultural environment in Newark where plants are grown without soil or sunlight. He graduated from Columbia and received a master’s degree in management from the London School of Economics. He is the son of Carrie Schoenfeld of Ghent, N.Y., and Larry Schatz of Asheville, N.C. The groom’s father, who retired as a media executive, was the founding chairman of the John A. Reisenbach Foundation in Manhattan, which was dedicated to making New York City a safer place to live and work. His mother was an artist for the Scenic Artist Union Local 829, and later worked for the Eliran Murphy Group, a media company in New York. The groom is the stepson of Nancy Schatz and Fiore Guglielmi. His stepmother is a psychologist in private practice in Asheville. His stepfather retired as a salesman at Bergdorf Goodman in Manhattan. The groom’s maternal grandfather, Gerald Schoenfeld, was the chairman of the Shubert Organization and head of the mayor’s Midtown Citizens Committee. The couple met through OkCupid in 2014. Heather Chronis, Michael Danek Heather Anne Chronis and Michael Vincent Danek were married April 6. The Rev. Brian Bennett, a Lutheran minister, performed the ceremony at the Heinz Memorial Chapel on the campus of the University of Pittsburgh. Mrs. Danek, 49, is a development officer and director of patient relations for the Eye & Ear Foundation at the University of Pittsburgh, from which she graduated. She is the daughter of the late Perry A. Chronis and the late Nicholas A Chronis of Sparta, Tenn. The bride’s father retired as a chief master sergeant in the Air Force and worked for the United States Civil Service Commission in Washington.The bride’s mother was a mental health counselor at Plateau Mental Health Center in Cookeville, Tenn. Mr. Danek, 47, is a clinical staff pharmacist at the Veterans Affairs Pittsburgh Healthcare System. He also graduated from the University of Pittsburgh, from which he also received a law degree. He is a son of Regina A. Danek and the late Stanley E. Danek of Charleroi, Pa. The groom’s mother retired as an elementary school art teacher with the Ringgold School District in Donora, Pa. The groom’s father was a steelworker for the United States Steel Corporation at the Mon Valley Works Irvin Plant in West Mifflin, Pa. The couple met in December 2010 on a blind date arranged by a mutual friend. Vidya Puthenpura, Vijay Yanamadala Dr. Vidya Puthenpura and Dr. Vijay Yanamadala were married April 7 at the Grove in Cedar Grove, N.J. Sri Gnana Skandhan, a Hindu priest, officiated. The bride, 28, is a resident physician in New Brunswick, N.J., in the Department of Pediatrics at Rutgers Robert Wood Johnson Medical School, from which she received a medical degree. She graduated from the University of Pennsylvania. In July, she is to begin a fellowship in pediatric hematology and oncology at Yale. She is the daughter of Mini Puthenpura and Sarat C. Puthenpura of Berkeley Heights, N.J. Her father is the assistant vice president and executive director of service quality management research at AT&T in Bedminster, N.J. The groom, 31, is a resident physician in the Department of Neurosurgery at Massachusetts General Hospital in Boston. He graduated from Harvard, from which he also received a master’s degree in chemistry, a medical degree and an M.B.A. He is the son of Dr. Sita Laksmi Yanamadala and Dr. Srinivas Yanamadala of Palos Verdes Estates, Calif. The groom’s mother is a nephrologist in private practice in Long Beach, Calif. His father, an otorhinolaryngologist, is also in private practice, in Torrance, Calif. The couple met through a mutual friend in January 2015. Delaney Simon, Graeme Smith Delaney Simon and Graeme Smith were married April 6 in an outdoor ceremony on the beach in Malibu, Calif. Leo Sidran, a Universal Life minister and a friend of the couple, officiated. The bride, 28, is the special assistant to the United Nations special coordinator for Lebanon in Beirut. She graduated cum laude from Barnard College and received a master’s degree in international security, conflict resolution and gender policy from Columbia. From 2013-15 she worked for Afghanistan’s permanent mission to the United Nations in New York, which included assisting negotiations on Security Council reform and small arms and light weapons agreements. She is a daughter of Emily Simon and Ralph Simon of London. The bride’s father is the founder of Mobilium Global Limited, a mobile technology consultant based in London that provides insight and strategy to companies worldwide in mobile and connected device strategies. From 1993-95, he served as the executive vice president of Capitol Records and Blue Note Records in Hollywood. He also was a founder of Jive Records in London. The bride’s mother, a former entertainment lawyer in London, founded the Women’s Foundation there. The groom, 38, was until March 1 a political affairs officer for the United Nations Assistance Mission in Kabul, Afghanistan. From 2012-15, he was the Afghanistan country director for the International Crisis Group, a global think tank also based in Kabul. He is now a freelance writer and political analyst based in Beirut. He is also the author of “The Dogs Are Eating Them Now: Our War in Afghanistan” (Knopf and Counterpoint). He graduated from Ryerson University in Toronto. He is the son of Lynn M. Gresham of Kitchener, Ontario, and Stewart G. Smith of New Hamburg, Ontario. The groom’s mother retired as an English teacher at Conestoga College Institute of Technology and Advanced Learning in Kitchener, where she lives with her wife, Wanda Manning, a retired nurse. His father is a sculptor based in New Hamburg, where he lives with his wife, Elisabeth Feryn, a freelance photographer. The couple met in 2015 Kabul during a meeting for political staff of the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan. Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              