   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Weddings Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Megan Brandt-Meyer, Matthew Moretz Image Aug. 7, 2016 Megan Irene Brandt-Meyer and the Rev. Matthew John Moretz were married Aug. 6. The Rev. Susan C. Harriss, an Episcopal priest, performed the ceremony at St. Bartholomew’s Church in New York. Ms. Brandt-Meyer, 33, will keep her name. She is a paralegal in the Jersey City office of Tullett Prebon, a London-based brokerage firm. She graduated summa cum laude from Wagner College and received a master’s degree in history from N.Y.U. She is a daughter of Ann I. B. Brandt of Portland, Me., and Eric L. Meyer of Whitefield, Me. The bride’s father is the president of Spurwink Services, a behavioral health and educational services agency in Portland. Her mother is a lawyer in the legal services department at the Maine State Public Retirement System, in Augusta, Me. The bride is also a stepdaughter of Patricia C. McKenzie, the manager of crisis centers for the Opportunity Alliance, a community mental health agency in Portland, and of Jeffrey A. Howe, a software developer at Blue Marble Geographics, a cartographic software company in Hallowell, Me. Father Moretz, 37, is an associate rector at St. Bartholomew’s. He graduated cum laude from Davidson College and received a master’s of divinity from the General Theological Seminary of the Episcopal Church. His previous marriage ended in divorce. He is a son of Susan P. Moretz and John D. Moretz of Augusta, Ga. The groom’s mother retired as a registered nurse there at the hospital of the Medical College of Georgia. His father owns a company bearing his name in Augusta that provides staging for events. The couple met in 2013 at a birthday party. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page ST 15 of the New York edition with the headline: Megan Brandt-Meyer,  Matthew Moretz . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              