   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index New York Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by New York Today New York Today: A Sweet Spot for Fishing Image Hook, line and sinker. Credit Ángel Franco/The New York Times By  Alexandra S. Levine April 28, 2017 Updated, 11:12 a.m. Good morning on this sunlit Friday. With April came the start of fishing season in New York. And for a city, its fishing prospects are superb, we are told. “It astounded me — the angling opportunities, the species diversity and the fact that you can catch a trophy fish with the Empire State Building behind you,” said Darin Alberry, a fisheries biologist for the New York State Department of Environmental Conservation and a longtime angler. New York Harbor is home to an abundance of small invertebrates that attract the larger, predator species that anglers are trying to catch. April, May and June is what Mr. Alberry calls “prime time” for those who fish in New York. During early spring, the most sought-after trophy fish, or “game species,” in our waters are striped bass (migrating down the Hudson and East Rivers) and bluefish (coming from deeper water offshore). Want to give it a try? If you’re a beginner , Mr. Alberry suggested starting with freshwater fishing at these locations across the boroughs . These lakes, ponds, rivers and streams are catch-and-release locales (“Catch a fish, pick it up, take a picture, and put it back in the water,” Mr. Alberry said). You can expect to find members of the sunfish family — pumpkinseed, bluegills and largemouth bass. If you’re 16 or older, you’ll need to purchase a license . You can also learn to fish through the state’s free  clinics at I FISH NY . For the more advanced angler, Mr. Alberry suggested saltwater fishing at these locations . (Unlike catch-and-release freshwater fishing, you can “go out, fish” and “take it home for dinner” if your catch of the day meets these regulations .) You’ll need to be on the marine registry, and you can get the free license here . Study the local tides and currents before you go. (Find information on where to fish, when to fish and more on the Department of Environmental Conservation’s fishing, hunting and wildlife app .) And if you’re not keen on fishing but love the water, look for dolphins, whales, otters, seals or green turtles when you take a ferry. Here’s what else is happening: Weather Well hello, sunshine. Your cloudy commute could be hit with rain showers, but by midmorning the skies begin to clear — revealing blue skies and a high near 79 . Ideal weather for dropping a line, watchin’ the tide roll away, and wastin’ time . Saturday is looking warm and cloudy, and Sunday should have some sun, with temperatures in the low 60s. Reel nice. In the News • Amtrak plans to close several tracks at Pennsylvania Station this summer, but its chief executive would not say for how long. [ New York Times ] • New York firefighters said goodbye to William N. Tolley, who died battling a fire in Queens last week. [ New York Times ] Image A fire truck bearing the coffin of William N. Tolley in Bethpage, N.Y. Credit Chang W. Lee/The New York Times • How does school segregation still happen? [ New York Times ] • The first police officers in body cameras took to the streets in Washington Heights. [ New York Times ] • The mayoral hopeful Bo Dietl is defending himself against accusations of racism after saying he knew he “had a problem” when facing a black judge. [ New York Times ] Image Bo Dietl, a would-be Republican candidate for mayor, addressing a gathering in Manhattan on Wednesday. Credit Karsten Moran for The New York Times • Joseph Ponte, the correction commissioner, spent a quarter of 2016 outside the city, even as violence at Rikers Island was spiraling out of control. [ New York Times ] • The Metropolitan Transportation Authority secured 200 diesel buses for use during the L train shutdown in 2019, upsetting environmental activists. [ DNAinfo ] • State lawmakers are considering allowing the police to use a “textalyzer” to crack down on people texting while driving. [ NPR ] • The city often pays a premium when reserving hotel rooms for homeless families. [ NBC ] • An 8-year old boy died after a concrete flowerpot fell on his head. [ NY1 ] • The luxurious bathrooms at Bryant Park reopened. [ Associated Press ] • In “ Big City ,” Ginia Bellafante writes about a fertility specialist who offers a lottery for free in vitro fertilization treatments, laying bare a Las Vegas-style medical culture in the city. [ New York Times ] Image Dr. John Zhang, a specialist in reproductive medicine, at the New Hope Fertility Center in Manhattan. Credit Benjamin Norman for The New York Times • The extension of the No. 7 train in Manhattan has reverberated in Queens, where industrial tenants have been pushed out in favor of back-office types, Jim Dwyer writes in “ About New York .” [ New York Times ] • Today’s Metropolitan Diary: “ A Bulldog on Court Street ” • Scoreboard: Braves startle Mets , 7-5. Senators filibuster Rangers , 2-1, in round 2 of the playoff series. Yankees muddy Red Sox , 3-0. • For a global look at what’s happening, see Your Friday Briefing . Coming Up Today • It’s your last chance to see “ Tattooed New York ,” an exhibition at the New-York Historical Society on the Upper West Side. 10 a.m. to 8 p.m., through Sunday. [$20] • … and you can watch a live tattoo demonstration there, by the artist Angelo Saracina of Fineline Tattoo , from 2 to 5 p.m. [Free with museum admission] • En garde! Take a fencing class on the Fifth Avenue Terrace of Bryant Park in Midtown Manhattan. 1:30 p.m. [Free] • Children can see the movie “Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles” under the stars at the Willowbrook Park Archery Range on Staten Island. 7 p.m. [Free] • Laugh into the weekend at a comedy show starring Vic Dibitetto at the Looney Bin Comedy Club on Staten Island. 9 p.m. [$25] •  Nasty Women Unite Fest — an evening of stories, comedy and music by women — at Joe’s Pub in NoHo. 11:30 p.m. [$20] • Yankees host Orioles, 7:05 p.m. (YES). Mets at Nationals, 7:05 p.m. (SNY). • Alternate-side parking remains in effect until May 25. The Weekend Saturday • Jump into (or just watch) the spring Double Dutch tournament at Sorrentino Recreation Center in Far Rockaway, Queens. 9:30 a.m. [Free] • The Sakura Matsuri cherry blossom festival at the Brooklyn Botanic Garden. 10 a.m. to 6 p.m., through Sunday. [$30, tickets here ] • The Rainbow Book Fair highlights lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender writers, at John Jay College of Criminal Justice in Midtown Manhattan. Noon to 6 p.m. • Wine lovers can enjoy a daffodil celebration and wine weekend at the New York Botanical Garden in the Bronx. Noon to 4 p.m., through Sunday. [$28] • Watch an outdoor screening of “Dr. Strange” in Clove Lakes Park on Staten Island. 7 p.m. [Free] • Yankees host Orioles, 1:05 p.m. (YES). Mets at Nationals, 1:05 p.m. (WPIX). Rangers at Senators, 3 p.m. (NBC). New York City F.C. at Columbus Crew, 7:30 p.m. (YES). Red Bulls host Chicago Fire, 7:30 p.m. (MSG). Sunday • The Brooklyn Folk Festival brings blues, bluegrass and more to St. Ann & the Holy Trinity Church in Brooklyn Heights. Times and prices vary. • Arbor Fest brings live music, a petting zoo and more to the Queens Botanical Garden in Flushing. 11 a.m. to 5 p.m. [$10] • Play games from the 1960s and ’70s in a street-game festival at Thomas Jefferson Park in East Harlem. 11 a.m. to 3 p.m. [Free] • Queens Jazz OverGround brings performances and workshops to a festival at Flushing Town Hall in Queens. Noon to 10 p.m. [Free] • Learn about the history of Coney Island on a walking tour through the Brooklyn amusement park, beginning at the Parachute Jump. 1 p.m. [Free] • Yankees host Orioles, 1:05 p.m. (YES). Mets at Nationals, 1:35 p.m. (WPIX). • For more events, see The New York Times’s Arts & Entertainment guide . And Finally... Image Ancient Egypt in modern Manhattan. Credit Benjamin Norman for The New York Times There’s a place in New York that looks more like ancient Egypt than modern-day Manhattan: It’s the Temple of Dendur. The aeolian sandstone temple, built in the first century B.C. on the banks of the Nile, officially became a New York transplant 50 years ago today , on April 28, 1967 , when President Lyndon B. Johnson awarded it to the Metropolitan Museum of Art. The impetus for relocating the monument was, in large part, to protect it against flooding from the rising waters of the Nile. It was quite the process. The temple was dismantled in Egypt, packed into crates and placed aboard the Concordia Star freighter for the trip across the Atlantic Ocean to New York City. The blocks were then loaded onto large trucks that rolled down Fifth Avenue. The structure was reassembled by conservators and stonemasons at the Met. The Temple of Dendur is closed this weekend, but it will reopen to the public at 10 a.m. on May 5. New York Today is a weekday roundup that stays live from 6 a.m. till late morning. If you don’t get it in your inbox already, you can sign up to receive it by email here . For updates throughout the day, like us on Facebook . What would you like to see here to start your day? Post a comment, email us at nytoday@nytimes.com , or reach us via Twitter using #NYToday . Follow the New York Today columnists, Alexandra Levine and Jonathan Wolfe , on Twitter. You can find the latest New York Today at nytoday.com . Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              