   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Politics Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Tom Price’s Heated Hearing Is Unlikely to Derail His Nomination Video At Tom Price’s confirmation hearing for health secretary, Ron Wyden, Democratic senator from Oregon, described some of Mr. Price's investments as a conflict of interest and an abuse of position. Published On Jan. 24, 2017 Credit Image by Al Drago/The New York Times By  Robert Pear Jan. 24, 2017 WASHINGTON — In a heated confirmation hearing that focused on ethical issues, President Trump’s nominee for secretary of health and human services, Representative Tom Price, defended his trading of medical and pharmaceutical stocks on Tuesday, saying, “Everything that I did was ethical, aboveboard, legal and transparent.” Democrats accused Mr. Price of a potential conflict of interest at a hearing of the Senate Finance Committee, saying he held more than $100,000 in stock in companies that could have benefited from legislation he promoted. Mr. Price, a Georgia Republican, denied any wrongdoing. He also avoided being pinned down on the future of the Affordable Care Act, Medicare and Medicaid, programs that insure more than 100 million people. While Mr. Price faced vigorous questioning from Democrats, he and other cabinet nominees have benefited from solid support among Republicans, who hold a 52-48 majority in the Senate. But some nominees had bipartisan support. By a vote of 96 to 4, the Senate approved the nomination of Gov. Nikki R. Haley of South Carolina to be ambassador to the United Nations. Senator Benjamin L. Cardin of Maryland, the senior Democrat on the Foreign Relations Committee, praised Ms. Haley for “moral clarity,” noting that she had declared that the Russians were guilty of war crimes in bombing the Syrian city of Aleppo — an assertion that Rex W. Tillerson, Mr. Trump’s choice for secretary of state, declined to make. Senate committees endorsed other nominations on Tuesday: Elaine L. Chao for transportation secretary, Wilbur L. Ross for commerce secretary and Ben Carson for secretary of housing and urban development. Linda McMahon, selected by Mr. Trump to lead the Small Business Administration, also sailed through her confirmation hearing. She was introduced and endorsed by the senators from her home state, Connecticut: Richard Blumenthal and Christopher S. Murphy, both Democrats. The endorsements were notable because Ms. McMahon ran for the Senate and was defeated by Mr. Blumenthal in 2010 and Mr. Murphy in 2012. Donald Trump’s Cabinet Is Complete. Here’s the Full List. A list of appointees and nominees for top posts in the new administration. Nov. 12, 2016 Even as some nominees advanced, Republicans were becoming frustrated and angry. They said Democrats were delaying and prolonging the reviews, raising procedural objections without changing the likely outcome. Senator John Cornyn of Texas, the No. 2 Senate Republican, accused the Democrats of “obstruction and foot-dragging” and said they were “attempting to litigate or re-litigate the election.” Senator John Thune, Republican of South Dakota, said: “The president won an election. He deserves to get his people in place.” The hard feelings felt to some like payback. Democrats noted that Republicans had stalled many of President Barack Obama’s picks and refused to act on his nomination of Judge Merrick B. Garland to the Supreme Court. In the Senate Committee on Energy and Natural Resources, Democrats held up confirmation votes for two nominees: Representative Ryan Zinke of Montana for interior secretary and former Gov. Rick Perry of Texas for energy secretary. The Democrats said they had unanswered questions about important research programs at the Energy Department. Democrats on the Finance Committee put Mr. Price through three and a half hours of grueling interrogation. But they appeared unlikely to block his confirmation unless other damaging information comes to light. “We’ve always known where the votes are,” said Senator Ron Wyden of Oregon, the senior Democrat on the committee. The panel could vote next week on whether to recommend confirmation, with its Republican majority strongly supporting Mr. Price. Mr. Price was asked about an executive order issued by Mr. Trump on Friday that tells federal officials to provide relief from costs, penalties and regulatory burdens imposed on consumers, insurers and health care providers by the Affordable Care Act. Mr. Wyden asked Mr. Price if he would promise that no one would be worse off and no one would lose coverage as a result of the order. Mr. Price declined to provide an explicit assurance. He promised instead to work with Congress to “make certain that we have the highest-quality health care and that every single American has access to affordable coverage.” Senator Maria Cantwell, Democrat of Washington, said the administration appeared to be planning a “war on Medicaid.” Mr. Price rejected that description, saying he wanted to give states more control over Medicaid, which covers more than 70 million low-income people. Senator Dean Heller, Republican of Nevada, asked Mr. Price for a commitment that any replacement for the Affordable Care Act would allow states to continue the expansion of Medicaid eligibility already approved by Nevada and 30 other states. Mr. Price deferred to Congress, saying, “This is a policy question that needs to be worked out through both the House and the Senate.” He said he wanted to ensure that people “who are currently covered through Medicaid expansion either retain that coverage or in some way have coverage through a different vehicle.” In any event, he said, “every single individual ought to be able to have access to coverage.” He added that many people had Medicaid coverage but could not find doctors to treat them. “One out of three physicians who ought to be able to see Medicaid patients in this nation do not take any Medicaid patients” because of low reimbursement rates, burdensome regulations or the “hassle factor,” Mr. Price said. Mr. Price has led efforts to repeal the Affordable Care Act. He refused on Tuesday to say whether he would fight to preserve the expanded coverage of prescription drugs provided to Medicare beneficiaries under the law. Rather, he said, “it is imperative we provide the greatest amount of opportunity for individual seniors to be able to gain access to the drugs that they need.” That answer did not satisfy Senator Bill Nelson, Democrat of Florida, which is home to more than four million Medicare beneficiaries. “If I gave them that answer,” Mr. Nelson said, “I would get run out of the room with a group of senior citizens.” Mr. Price also declined to say how he would carry out Mr. Trump’s promise to drive down prescription drug prices. Mr. Trump has said he will do so by negotiating with drug manufacturers and by requiring them to bid for government business. A background investigation of Mr. Price found that he had understated the value of his investments in an Australian pharmaceutical company and claimed income tax deductions that he could not substantiate. The findings emerged from a review of his tax returns and other official documents by Finance Committee staff members from both parties. In a questionnaire in December, the staff said, Mr. Price understated the value of 400,613 shares of the Australian company, Innate Immunotherapeutics, that he purchased in August through “a private placement offering.” “It’s hard to see how this can be anything but a conflict of interest and an abuse of his position,” Mr. Wyden said. But Mr. Price said that he did not have any “nonpublic information” about the company. And the committee chairman, Senator Orrin G. Hatch, Republican of Utah, said the Democrats’ attacks on Mr. Price’s ethics were “specious and distorted.” The committee staff added that Mr. Price had taken “improper deductions on his 2016 tax returns” for the depreciation of land associated with condominiums he owns in Washington and Nashville. He and his wife, both physicians, also claimed “miscellaneous employment deductions totaling $19,034” for expenses in 2013, 2014 and 2015, the staff said. But “proper documentation could not be located,” so his returns will be amended. Thomas Kaplan and Emmarie Huetteman contributed reporting.  Follow The New York Times’s politics and Washington coverage on Facebook and Twitter , and sign up for the First Draft politics newsletter . A version of this article appears in print on , on Page A 14 of the New York edition with the headline: Heated Hearing for Health Nominee Is Unlikely to Derail His Confirmation . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Related Coverage Choice for Health Secretary Is Vague on Replacing Affordable Care Act Jan. 18, 2017 Image Trump’s Health Secretary Pick Leaves Nation’s Doctors Divided Dec. 26, 2016 Image Tom Price Is Eager to Lead H.H.S., and Reduce Its Clout Dec. 4, 2016 Image Tom Price, Obamacare Critic, Is Trump’s Choice for Health Secretary Nov. 28, 2016 Image Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              