   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Opinion Supported by Where Credit Is Due By  Linda Greenhouse March 5, 2015 The obituaries , at least the ones I saw, for Dr. John C. Willke, the former president of the National Right to Life Committee, featured his kooky (and politically toxic) notion that rape can’t lead to pregnancy. But this hugely effective strategist of the anti-abortion movement, who died on Feb. 20 at 89, deserved a better send-off. That’s the purpose of this column. Granted, I’m not the most obvious writer to be offering Jack Willke a post-mortem salute, given my own commitment to the abortion rights side of the public argument that he conducted for close to 50 years. But that’s actually the point. It’s easy for any social movement to demonize its adversaries — or, even worse, to ignore them. It’s harder to acknowledge an adversary’s brilliance, and a great deal more useful to learn from it. News of Dr. Willke’s death arrived the same day as the dreary but unsurprising news that yet another Republican politician, this time Gov. Scott Walker of Wisconsin, has forsaken his libertarian leanings on abortion in favor of pandering to the Christian Right base. Dr. Willke, a family doctor and father of six when he got involved in the issue, didn’t pander to any base. Instead, he sought the most effective tools to persuade the skeptical and the unpersuaded. In 1971, Dr. Willke and his wife, Barbara, a former nursing professor, self-published a pocket-size book they called “Handbook on Abortion,” priced at $1. It sold 1.5 million copies in the first 18 months, went through many editions and was translated into many languages. (It’s still available from used book sellers on the Internet.) The book’s purpose was to arm readers with a framework and vocabulary to counter what the Willkes described in the introduction as the “tremendous push for more permissive abortion laws.” They noted that “only a few private and religious publications, it seems, have attempted to present the other side.” The Willkes were Catholic (Barbara Willke, a full partner in her husband’s enterprise, died in 2013), and before they devoted themselves full time to the anti-abortion cause, they had lectured and written widely on sex and marriage from the Catholic perspective, a perspective that ruled out contraception. One of their smartest moves when they turned to pro-life advocacy was to avoid faith-based arguments. “Our emphasis, we are convinced,” they wrote, “must be on the scientific, medical and social aspects of this issue if we hope to present the facts in a way that can influence our pluralistic society. Theological considerations are critical to each person individually but cannot be imposed upon other non-believers in the culture.” At the time, categorical opposition to abortion was almost exclusively a Catholic position; many Protestant denominations and organizations, including the National Association of Evangelicals and the Southern Baptist Convention, had in fact recently adopted nuanced positions in support of moderate reform. The Willkes recognized that they couldn’t sell their message beyond the community of fellow Catholics unless they could dispel the notion that their activism was dictated by religious doctrine rather than personal moral insight. “Handbook on Abortion” was organized as a catechism, a series of questions and answers. One question was: “Aren’t all Catholics subservient to the directives of their Church?” The answer: “Definitely not. As everyone knows, a large percentage of ‘good’ Catholics disagree with their church’s laws on birth control. In fact, most Catholics who oppose abortion do so not because the church tells them to but because they are convinced that the unborn child is human and should be protected.” In its 151 pages, the book addressed the most common arguments that were then circulating in favor of abortion reform. “Isn’t it true that restrictive abortion laws are unfair to the poor?” was one question. One of several answers: “What is unfair is that poor people have not been given an adequate education and an adequate opportunity to better themselves. We will not eliminate poverty by killing poor people. The problem of the poor and the under-educated is their destitution and their lack of opportunity to achieve a better life, not the fact that they have children.” First published two years before the Supreme Court’s ruling in Roe v. Wade, the book also took on the privacy argument. “What of the right of a woman to the privacy of her own body?” was the question. An excerpt from the answer: “If you, as a citizen, stand outside of a door and listen to a mother battering her child, what would you do? Would you respect the privacy of her home? You would not! You would open or break down the door and rescue the child.” On the question of rape, the Willkes maintained, as Dr. Willke was to reiterate in stronger terms many years later, that pregnancy resulting from rape was “extremely rare.” (Years later, Dr. Willke wrote with more specificity that the trauma of rape could “radically upset” a woman’s biology to the extent of preventing pregnancy. The American Congress of Obstetricians and Gynecologists said in 2012 that this view “contradicts basic biological truths.”) Question: “But, even if rare, some girls are forcefully raped and some do get pregnant. Should they be forced to carry an unwanted child?” Answer: “Legal authorities say that to change the entire law for a very few cases would open a Pandora’s Box.” The book contained a variety of arguments for the position that life begins at conception. The descriptions of genetics and neonatology were straightforward and accessible. But there were also color photographs of aborted fetuses and fetal parts. The book helped popularize the use of such images in campaigns against abortion and later at demonstrations outside abortion clinics. While the juxtaposition of the gruesome images and the almost avuncular text was jarring, it demonstrated Dr. Willke’s ability to speak in different registers simultaneously in order to reach the widest possible audience. By the early 1990s, he acknowledged that a one-dimensional argument focused on the fetus was losing its persuasive ability. So he expanded his frame to encompass the welfare of pregnant women and new mothers. He was one of the anti-abortion movement’s pioneers in constructing and putting forward what Prof. Reva B. Siegel of Yale Law School has termed the “woman-protective antiabortion argument,” based on the claim that abortion harmed women physically and emotionally. In an article in the Duke Law Journal in 2008, Professor Siegel quoted Dr. Willke’s explanation of how “we did the market research” to come up with the new approach. The general public, Dr. Willke wrote in a publication of his Life Issues Institute, “felt that pro-life people were not compassionate to women and that we were only ‘fetus lovers’ who abandoned the mother after the birth. . . We had to convince the public that we were compassionate to women. Accordingly, we test marketed variations of this theme. Thus was born the slogan ‘Love Them Both.’” In 1997, the Willkes came out with a new edition of their “Handbook on Abortion,” re-titled “Why Not Love Them Both? Questions and Answers About Abortion.” The woman-protective framework for opposition to abortion made its way with surprising speed to the Supreme Court, emerging in Justice Anthony M. Kennedy’s majority opinion in Gonzales v. Carhart , the 2007 decision that upheld the federal Partial-Birth Abortion Ban Act. In 2009, Reva Siegel and I set out to collect primary-source documents that would show how the arguments for and against abortion reform proceeded during the years leading up to Roe v. Wade. We wanted to illustrate the complexity of those years — the diversity of opinion among conservative religious groups, for example — and also to provide evidence to refute the conventional wisdom that the anti-abortion movement was launched in reaction to the Supreme Court’s decision. For the book that we planned, we clearly needed to be able to print a sizable excerpt from the pre-Roe “Handbook on Abortion,” and for that, we needed the Willkes’ permission. Obtaining permission to reprint documents had not been easy from either side of the debate. The estate of Betty Friedan, the feminist leader and founder of the National Organization for Women, charged us a substantial amount to reprint excerpts from two of her speeches. N.O.W. itself charged for reprinting its 1967 “bill of rights,” a list of the organization’s eight top priorities. Americans United for Life, which emerged quickly after its founding in 1971 as a major player on the pro-life side, refused to deal with us at all. So it was with some trepidation that we approached Dr. Willke, who was then 84 years old. We wrote to him, indicating the pages from “Handbook on Abortion” that we wanted to include in our book. After a few letters back and forth, he gave us his permission, if not exactly his blessing; clearly he had his doubts, despite our assurances, that we really did intend to provide a fair representation of both sides. He charged us nothing, asking only for two copies of the finished book. The excerpt from “Handbook” ended up filling 12 pages of our book, the longest excerpt from a single document. (Our book, “Before Roe v. Wade: Voices That Shaped the Abortion Debate Before the Supreme Court’s Ruling,” is available as a free download from the Yale Law School library’s web site.) We didn’t expect Dr. Willke to respond, but a few months after we sent the two copies, a letter arrived, signed by both “Barb” and “Jack.” While they had expected that “we would probably end up in giving you a ‘D-minus,’ “ the Willkes wrote, “we are pleased to tell you that we give you a solid ‘B.’” They said they found the book fair to their side, adding that “we think its treatment of pre-Roe v. Wade is by far the best historical account that we have seen.” (A “B” after such a generous review? No grade inflation at the Willkes’, evidently.) Dr. Willke was surely under no illusion that our encounter with his life’s work had changed our minds, but he was willing to give us the credit he thought was due. In this space, I do the same. Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              