   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Health Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Global Health China’s Bird Flu Surge Is a Low Epidemic Threat, W.H.O. Says Image A patient with the H7N9 bird flu receiving treatment in a hospital in Wuhan, central China’s Hubei province, in February. Flu specialists from around the world met in Geneva this week to assess the global influenza situation. Credit Chinatopix, via Agence France-Presse — Getty Images By  Donald G. McNeil Jr. March 1, 2017 查看简体中文版 Although there has been a surge in human infections with H7N9 avian flu in China this winter, the risk of an epidemic remains low, a World Health Organization official said on Wednesday. But the virus — which has killed about a third of the people known to have caught it — has now split into two distinct strains. That will probably force development of a second small stockpile of emergency vaccine to be rolled out if the virus becomes more transmissible and threatens to turn into a pandemic, a scientist at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said. Flu specialists from around the world gathered in Geneva this week to assess the global influenza situation and discuss with vaccine companies which viral strains should be in next winter’s flu shots. China has had 460 lab-confirmed human cases of H7N9 bird flu this winter , said Dr. Wenqing Zhang, head of the W.H.O.’s global influenza program. That is the most in any flu season since the first human case was found in 2013. The new strain kills more birds, which may make China’s poultry industry more willing to shut live bird markets and do more to protect poultry farms from infection. Almost all cases have been caught directly from birds. A few cases have been passed from a victim to a family member or caregiver, but there is no evidence of “sustained human-to-human transmission,” Dr. Zhang said. Viruses designated H1, H2 or H3, along with a separate B lineage, have caused virtually all seasonal flu cases in humans. H5N1, a strain that sparked widespread fear of bird flu in 2003, still occasionally kills a few people each year, and another, H5N8, is widely circulating in poultry in Europe and the Middle East. But no H5 or H7 strain has ever been transmitted easily among humans. New cases of H7N9 are declining, so this winter’s outbreak appears to have peaked, said Yuelong Shu, an influenza expert at China’s Center for Disease Control and Prevention. About 7 percent of the cases were resistant to drugs like Tamiflu. But that percentage, Dr. Shu added, has not increased substantially since 2013, and almost all resistant cases were in people who had already been treated with antivirals. Resistance probably arose individually in each patient, making it less likely that a drug-resistant strain is circulating in birds, he said. As a precaution, American scientists have been making an H7N9 seed vaccine from which an emergency stockpile could be brewed if the virus became both lethal and highly transmissible, said Jacqueline Katz, deputy director of the C.D.C.’s flu division. Now that the virus has split into two strains, the agency is discussing making a second seed vaccine, Dr. Katz said. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page D 4 of the New York edition with the headline: Low Epidemic Risk Seen in China’s Bird Flu Rise . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Related Coverage W.H.O. Warns of Worrisome Bird Flu in China Jan. 25, 2017 Image Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              