   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Weddings Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Carly Guss,  Chase Samsel June 28, 2015 Image Credit Rebecca Arthurs Dr. Carly Elizabeth Guss and Dr. Chase Baldwin Samsel are to be married Sunday by Rabbi Julie Zupan at the Rosecliff mansion in Newport, R.I. The bride and groom both work at Boston Children’s Hospital. Dr. Guss, 31, is a fellow in adolescent medicine. Dr. Samsel, 33, is a child psychiatrist there and at the Dana-Farber Cancer Institute in Boston. Dr. Guss, who is keeping her name, graduated from Yale and received her medical degree from the University of Michigan. She is the daughter of Bonnie G. Guss and Dr. Robert B. Guss of Rancho Mirage, Calif. Dr. Samsel graduated cum laudefrom the University of Georgia and received his medical degree from the Medical College of Georgia in Augusta. He is the son of Gene L. Samsel Jr. of Holmes Beach, Fla., and the late Margaret B. Samsel, who lived in Amelia Island, Fla. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page ST 14 of the New York edition with the headline: Carly Guss,  Chase Samsel . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              