   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index New York Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Transgender Inmate Accuses Suffolk County of Unfair Medical Treatment Image Jessica Sunderland was transitioning to female when she was jailed in Suffolk County in 2012. After the jail refused to supply the hormones that she had been prescribed at a veterans’ hospital, Ms. Sunderland sued. Her case is before a federal judge on Long Island. Credit Annie Tritt for The New York Times By  Alan Feuer Oct. 24, 2017 In 2012, after falling prey to drug use and depression, an Iraq war veteran named Jessica Sunderland was arrested in connection with a string of burglaries on Long Island and found herself locked up in the Suffolk County jail. In her stay of 16 months, she experienced more than the usual ordeals. Formerly known as Jeremy, Ms. Sunderland was in the middle of transitioning to female and claimed her jailers had denied her the hormone treatment that she had been getting under doctors’ orders for the preceding two years. Even though she filed two grievances with jail officials and asked a local judge to put her back on hormones, she said that did not happen until after she left Suffolk County in 2014 for the upstate prison where she served her sentence. Before leaving, she sued the county in a slow-moving case that will soon have its first major review by a federal judge. In pursuing litigation, Ms. Sunderland, 31, has joined a growing list of transgender inmates who have used the courts to challenge what they have called an unfair lack of medical treatment in the nation’s prisons and jails. While courts have held for decades that the Eighth Amendment’s ban on “cruel and unusual punishments” gives inmates the constitutional right to necessary medical care, some facilities have been slow to extend that safeguard to prisoners who are transitioning. As gender dysphoria — a disconnect between one’s gender identity and one’s sex at birth — has increasingly been recognized as a medical condition, a body of case law has emerged in recent years requiring jailers to provide treatment to transgender inmates, just as they would those with heart disease or cancer. After settling a lawsuit brought by a transgender inmate in Missouri , the federal Bureau of Prisons established a policy in May 2011 requiring officials not only to evaluate its prisoners for gender dysphoria, but also to treat those who have it, even if they began their transition after entering federal custody. Four years later, the Justice Department under President Barack Obama intervened in a case in Georgia with a legal filing reminding state authorities of their “obligation to assess and treat gender dysphoria just as they would any other medical or mental health condition.” A liberal city in a mostly liberal state, New York opened a special housing unit for transgender inmates at Rikers Island in 2014, and the state’s prison system routinely gives hormone treatments to inmates in transition. But according to Lamba Legal, a group of lawyers and activists that handles lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender issues, almost 100 transgender inmates nationwide have called its legal help desk in the last two years complaining about not receiving proper treatment. “It’s an ongoing problem,” said Richard Saenz, a Lamba Legal lawyer. “It’s a legal issue we get requests for assistance on from all over the country.” Mr. Saenz added that corrections officials in Florida and Missouri are also being sued by transgender inmates who are challenging what are known as “freeze frame” policies, which fix prisoners’ medical care at the level at which they were receiving it when they first came into custody. Ms. Sunderland’s suit began in August 2013, when she submitted a handwritten complaint — without the assistance of a lawyer — to the Federal District Court in Central Islip, N.Y. “I am an inmate at the Suffolk County Correctional Facility,” she wrote, “and have been ignored and denied hormone treatment.” Two years later, after she was sent to serve her sentence at Downstate Correctional Facility in Fishkill, N.Y. (where she did receive treatment), she got a lawyer, David B. Shanies, who filed a new complaint accusing doctors at the Suffolk County jail of violating their own policy by denying his client treatment even though she had a hormone prescription from a veterans’ hospital in Manhattan. The suit filed by Mr. Shanies also claimed that county officials were responsible for Ms. Sunderland’s lack of care. In a motion to dismiss the case, a lawyer for the county said last month that Ms. Sunderland had undergone surgery to remove a liver tumor four months before entering the jail and that doctors there had determined that her hormone treatment could be dangerous. That her own physicians disagreed, the motion said, did not mean that members of the jail’s medical staff were “unconstitutionally indifferent” to her needs. The motion also argued that the county doctors — including Vincent Geraci, the medical director of the jail — were, as public employees, immune from being sued. It added that medical and legal opinions about gender dysphoria had changed significantly in recent years: Even if Dr. Geraci and his staff had stopped Ms. Sunderland’s treatment in 2012, that would not “rise to the level of a constitutional violation.” But as the case went into litigation, Mr. Shanies began to study Dr. Geraci’s Facebook page and discovered several instances in which he had liked what court papers filed last week described as “anti-transgender and anti-L.G.B.T. messages.” One of them was a photo posted by a user named Trump Wall depicting a bathroom sign with a caption reading, “Men DO NOT belong in the bathrooms with girls!” Another was an article posted by the conservative commentator Allen West about a movement to boycott Target for its transgender-friendly bathroom policy. In the comment section, Mr. West had written, “It looks like we’re not the only ones who have a problem with liberals pushing their transgender bathroom agenda.” At a deposition in April, Mr. Shanies asked Dr. Geraci about his activity on Facebook. According to a transcript, Dr. Geraci testified that he rarely spent much time looking at the articles or photographs in question and accused Mr. Shanies of trying to define him “based on the click of a button.” When Mr. Shanies asked if he did in fact think that “liberals are pushing their transgender bathroom agenda,” the doctor answered no. At some point in the next few months, United States District Judge Joseph F. Bianco will rule on the county’s motion to dismiss the suit, deciding if Ms. Sunderland’s case can move toward trial or settlement. She is seeking damages of at least $1 million. In an interview last week, Ms. Sunderland, who was released from prison in December, said that transitioning was hard enough, but to have done so in jail and without her hormone treatment was practically impossible. “It was like trying to climb Mount Everest,” she said. “You get halfway to the top and someone tries to pull you back down.” A version of this article appears in print on , on Page A 21 of the New York edition with the headline: In Suit, Transgender Inmate Cites Neglect in Care . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              