   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index U.S. Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by 2 V.A. Officials to Leave Posts as Agency Seeks to Remake Itself and Rebuild Trust By  Richard A. Oppel Jr. June 25, 2014 The Department of Veterans Affairs said Wednesday that two senior officials would be leaving their posts as the department’s acting secretary moved to remake the agency and rebuild trust amid a scandal over falsified waiting lists that were used at many hospitals to hide delays faced by veterans. The two officials are Dr. Robert L. Jesse, who has been serving as the department’s acting under secretary for health, and Will A. Gunn, the department’s general counsel. Dr. Jesse had stepped in last month as what is effectively the department’s head of health care, replacing Dr. Robert A. Petzel, who was ousted by Eric Shinseki, the Veterans Affairs secretary, just months before he was scheduled to retire. Mr. Shinseki himself stepped down two weeks later. Image Dr. Robert L. Jesse Credit T.J. Kirkpatrick/Getty Images Dr. Jesse, who had served as the department’s principal deputy under secretary for health since 2010, had critics on Capitol Hill. Just last week, he had come under fire from the chairman of the House Veterans Affairs Committee, Representative Jeff Miller, Republican of Florida, for what Mr. Miller characterized as “misleading” testimony this year about whether an outbreak of Legionnaires’ disease at the Veterans Affairs medical center in Pittsburgh had been caused by problems with hospital equipment or by human error. Dr. Jesse will be succeeded by Dr. Carolyn M. Clancy , who has served at the department since August as the assistant deputy under secretary for health for quality, safety and value. The department’s principal deputy general counsel, Tammy Kennedy, will step in after Mr. Gunn’s departure to serve as acting general counsel. In a statement, Sloan D. Gibson , who was named acting Veterans Affairs secretary one month ago after Mr. Shinseki’s departure, said Dr. Clancy “will be charged with the department’s top priority — getting veterans off wait lists and in to see their doctors,” while the department looks for a permanent under secretary for health. Image Will A. Gunn Credit Department of Veterans Affairs “She will also lead our efforts on immediate, national reforms to accelerate access to care and restore trust among our veterans, and I’m grateful to her for taking on this critical role,” Mr. Gibson added. Tom Tarantino, the chief policy officer for the Iraq and Afghanistan Veterans of America, said of the resignations, “Hopefully this is a symbol of a change in the V.A.’s accountability culture.” The department also said that Dr. Jonathan B. Perlin, who is the chief medical officer and president of clinical services for the Hospital Corporation of America, will be taking a leave of absence to serve on a short-term assignment as a senior adviser to Mr. Gibson. Dr. Perlin had previously served as the department’s under secretary for health during the administration of President George W. Bush. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page A 14 of the New York edition with the headline: 2 V.A. Officials to Leave Posts as Agency Seeks to Remake Itself and Rebuild Trust . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              