   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by The Ethicist Do I Have to Keep a Secret About a Family Member’s Health? By  Kwame Anthony Appiah , Amy Bloom and Kenji Yoshino June 10, 2015 Image Credit Illustration by La Tigre My uncle’s daughter texted this message to me a few days ago: “You didn’t hear this from me, and pretend this conversation didn’t take place. My dad went to the hospital this morning in an ambulance with a heart attack. My mom told me not to tell anyone, saying this is Dad’s news to tell, but I thought you would want to know. Whatever you do, please don’t tell your mom.” My uncle and I are very close, so I understand why his daughter would think I would want to know. Telling me this news when she was asked not to is her own ethical problem to resolve. However, knowing this information puts me in a very awkward position. Should I tell my 82-year-old mother about her 70-year-old brother’s health crisis? She would surely want to know this tidbit of info. Or do I honor my uncle’s family’s wishes not to tell my mother? How do we react when we’re officially told the news of the heart attack? If we pretend not to know anything happened, we’re lying, and that in itself is unethical. Or do we reply that we were told? NAME WITHHELD Amy Bloom: A couple of things in the letter really struck me. One was referring to your cousin as your “uncle’s daughter,” and the other was the phrase “this tidbit of info.” If you really regard it as only a tidbit, you might want to just keep your mouth shut and not say anything more about it. If you think that your mother is going to be very upset with you for not telling her, you have to weigh that. Your cousin told you for a reason: She wanted you to know. She might have even wanted you to spill the beans to the rest of the family, while feeling that she, having been directly ordered not to, could not. My very first step would be to contact your cousin and ask why the secrecy is necessary and when it is going to be lifted. Kwame Anthony Appiah: If someone tells you something while revealing that they were told not to tell you, they’re not in a very good position to complain if you then make the same judgment that the information is owed to somebody. This person has a responsibility to his mother that I would give a lot of weight. Part of the reason is that I don’t share the aunt’s judgment that the medical condition is, as she said, the uncle’s to tell. It seems to me that at least in a family in which people are texting in this sort of way and keeping track of one another’s behavior, this is a social group that has a shared life. And one resource the uncle has access to is the possibility of this loving family gathering around him. They’re not entitled to know which artery of the heart is affected or what the name of the doctor is or whether the uncle likes his nurses, but they are allowed to know that he’s in the hospital. He is sick, and it’s appropriate for the family to gather. I just think the aunt’s judgment is mistaken. Bloom: If the letter writer is close to his mother, I might say to the cousin: “I’ve got to tell you, I can’t keep this from my mother. I’m sorry.” And I would give the cousin a day to work it out with her own parents. Kenji Yoshino: There is a big difference between getting someone’s assent to hold something in confidence and then divulging a secret and simply telling them a secret and then telling them to keep their mouth shut. I would say go to the cousin, by all means. But even if she says, “I gave that information to you in confidence,” at that point you go to the uncle as your second port of call. You may be able to persuade him to tell your mother. If he doesn’t agree, you can go ahead and tell your mother yourself. I really don’t feel as though you are bound by a confidence that was unilaterally imposed on you. If I say to Anthony, “Keep this a secret — a meteor is about to crash into this building,” I don’t think Anthony is required to keep that secret. Appiah: If people have decent relations with one another, then going back to the person who made the demand on you and having a conversation about why you can’t do what was requested is probably the right place to start. After all, if your cousin has a good reason your mother shouldn’t be told, you would like to know it. In the absence of that, your relationship to your mother imposes special obligations. Bloom: I like the idea that the first port of call is the cousin and the second port of call is the uncle, and then you are basically free to do what you feel is best for your own familial relationships. My experience is that when someone tells you something in this kind of family network, they are not unaware of your relationships to other people in the family. There was a big nudge from that text. Kwame Anthony Appiah teaches philosophy at N.Y.U. His most recent book is “Lines of Descent: W. E. B. Du Bois and the Emergence of Identity.” Amy Bloom is a novelist and had a psychotherapy practice for 25 years. Her most recent book is “Lucky Us.” Kenji Yoshino teaches law at N.Y.U. and is the author, most recently, of “Speak Now: Marriage Equality on Trial.” To submit a query: Record one at 212-556-7070; send email to ethicists@nytimes.com ; or send mail to The Ethicists, The New York Times Magazine, 620 Eighth Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10018. (Include a daytime phone number.)  Sign up for our newsletter to get the best of The New York Times Magazine delivered to your inbox every week. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page 21 of the Sunday Magazine with the headline: Do I Have to Keep a Secret About a Family Member’s Health? . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              