   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Television Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by What’s on TV Saturday By  Kathryn Shattuck June 13, 2015 7:30 P.M. (HBO) GET ON UP (2014) Chadwick Boseman shuffles, spins and splits as James Brown, “the hardest-working man in show business” — as well as a monumental egotist, perfectionist and harsh taskmaster with a streak of paranoia — in this biopic directed by Tate Taylor (“The Help”). Nelsan Ellis is Bobby Byrd, Brown’s longtime best friend, who sticks around as the wives and girlfriends come and go. “Brown’s music and show business ascendance are the heart and soul of a movie that takes his art very seriously,” Stephen Holden wrote in The New York Times. “None other than Mick Jagger, who has made no secret of his indebtedness to Brown’s stage moves, is the music producer of this film, which puts music front and center, where it belongs. Brown’s real voice, which never sounds dubbed, is used in remixes of his original recordings.” And while the film “largely skirts the issue of race” along with Brown’s alienation of black audiences because of his support of Richard M. Nixon, “in the end, he stood above it all,” Mr. Holden added. “Having won the game, he dwelt in his own realm, where he ruled once and for always as the Godfather of Soul.” 9 P.M. (CUNY) MR. HULOT’S HOLIDAY (1953) Jacques Tati directed and stars in this pantomime caper about a hapless vacationer at a middle-class beach resort in France who destroys everything in his wake. Writing in The Times, Bosley Crowther compared Mr. Tati to Charlie Chaplin and Buster Keaton and called the film — most of it, at least — “good, fast, wholesome fun.” 9 P.M. (Starz) POWER Tommy (Joseph Sikora) agrees to help Ghost (Omari Hardwick) grow the drug business on the condition that he finds out what Angela (Lela Loren) knows about them. Elsewhere, Kanan (Curtis Jackson, a.k.a. 50 Cent) is released from jail. 10 P.M. (TBS) AFI LIFE ACHIEVEMENT AWARD: A TRIBUTE TO STEVE MARTIN Dan Aykroyd, Steve Carell, Tina Fey, Diane Keaton, Queen Latifah, Conan O’Brien, Amy Poehler, Carl Reiner, Sarah Silverman, Lily Tomlin and Mel Brooks — and more than 1,000 other guests — celebrate the career of Mr. Martin at this ceremony, taped in Los Angeles on June 4. 10 P.M. (BBC America) JONATHAN STRANGE & MR NORRELL Eddie Marsan portrays Mr Norrell, one of the few remaining magicians in 1806 England, at the time of the Napoleonic Wars, who has thrilled his countrymen by summoning an army of ghostly ships to terrify the French. Bertie Carvel is Jonathan Strange, the brilliant yet unschooled novice who will become Norrell’s student, inciting a battle of the dark arts. Does this seven-part show capture the spirit of Susanna Clarke’s 846-page fantasy novel, on which it’s based? “The answer, almost inevitably, is no — asked to produce more enchantment, they’ve countered by making a largely unremarkable mini-series,” Mike Hale wrote in The Times, comparing its style with a cross between “Doctor Who” and relatively sumptuous period dramas. Still, “the changes don’t make for an unpleasant viewing experience — ‘Jonathan Strange & Mr Norrell’ is great to look at,” he added. “It moves along at a gallop, and it’s not boring, even if it’s not exactly engaging either.” 11 P.M. (Comedy Central) JEFF ROSS ROASTS CRIMINALS: LIVE AT BRAZOS COUNTY JAIL Mr. Ross spent three days in a Texas correctional center playing basketball in the yard, spending time in solitary confinement, interviewing detention officers and listening to inmates’ stories. Then, surrounded by prisoners and guards, he skewered them. What’s Streaming Now HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH FILM FESTIVAL HIGHLIGHTS Streaming in conjunction with the festival, which runs through June 21 in New York, SundanceNow Doc Club presents eight films from previous years. The lineup includes “5 Broken Cameras,” about nonviolent resistance in a West Bank village surrounded by Israeli settlements; “After Tiller,” which investigates the ramifications of the 2009 murder of the abortion doctor George Tiller; and “Ai Weiwei: Never Sorry,” a portrait of the Chinese artist-activist. ( docclub.com ) THE OPEN MIND Alexander Heffner interviews Representative Charles B. Rangel, Democrat of New York, about his career. ( thirteen.org/openmind ) A version of this article appears in print on , on Page C 7 of the New York edition with the headline: What’s On TV Saturday . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              