   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Briefing Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by The N.F.L. and N.B.A., Puerto Rico, North Korea: Your Weekend Briefing By  Maya Salam and Lance Booth Sept. 24, 2017 Here are the week’s top stories, and a look ahead. Image Credit Pool photo by CJ Gunther 1. President Trump criticized the N.B.A., the N.F.L. and some of their most popular players over the role athletes play in race and social justice issues, as well as concerns about tackle-related brain damage that he said were “ruining” football. A day earlier, a lawyer for the family of Aaron Hernandez, above, the former New England Patriot convicted of murder, said doctors found he had the most severe form of the degenerative brain disease C.T.E. they’d ever seen in someone so young. He committed suicide in April at the age of 27. The players and their leagues were quick to respond to Mr. Trump. “U bum,” LeBron James tweeted , after Mr. Trump disinvited Stephen Curry of the Golden State Warriors to the White House. We’re following the intense reaction to Mr. Trump’s comments in this live briefing . _____ Image Credit Carlos Giusti/Associated Press 2. Disasters pummeled regions still recovering from other catastrophes. Puerto Rico may be without power for four to six months after Hurricane Maria devastated the island of 3.5 million people. “Us old people can’t make it that long,” said an 83-year-old resident. Above, a man in Yabucoa, P.R. Lines for gasoline stretched for blocks as people sought fuel for generators, and supplies of drinking water are in question. Structural damage to the Guajataca Dam prompted mass evacuations . Leaders of recently ravaged island nations pleaded at a special session of the U.N. General Assembly for aid to recover from devastating storms linked to climate change . And our “Daily” podcast has a compelling voice from one devastated island, Barbuda. ____ Image Credit Adriana Zehbrauskas for The New York Times 3. Thousands of rescue workers — their numbers bolstered by an uncounted army of civilian volunteers — banded together in Mexico City and surrounding regions to dig out survivors after a second powerful earthquake this month caused dozens of buildings to collapse, killing hundreds, including dozens of children . Here are photos of the capital city before and after the disaster. The region’s unusual position atop an ancient lake bed makes earthquakes particularly destructive, and lax enforcement of building codes doesn’t help . ____ Image Credit Ahn Young-Joon/Associated Press 4. A sharp escalation in the war of words between the leaders of North Korea and the U.S. drew the North’s threat to detonate a hydrogen bomb over the Pacific. Whether it has the capacity to do so, or would take the many risks entailed , is not clear. But the U.S. sent B-1B bombers and F-15C fighters the farthest north “any U.S. fighter or bomber aircraft have flown off North Korea’s coast in the 21st century.” The insults? President Trump, speaking at the U.N. General Assembly, threatened to “totally destroy” the North and called its leader, Kim Jong-un, “Rocket Man.” In a rare personal message, Mr. Kim shot back with “mentally deranged U.S. dotard” — sending many people scrambling for dictionaries . ____ Image Credit Chang W. Lee/The New York Times 5. Iran announced that it had tested a new ballistic missile with a range of about 1,200 miles, and that it would continue developing its arsenal, despite U.S. objections. President Trump’s interest in reopening nuclear negotiations with Iran drew words of caution from other world leaders. Iran’s foreign minister questioned its wisdom this way: “Are you prepared to return to us 10 tons of enriched uranium?” Several leaders attending the U.N. General Assembly added their signatures to a treaty that bans nuclear weapons . The world’s nine nuclear-armed countries denounced it as dangerously naïve. ____ Image Credit Tom Brenner/The New York Times 6. The Republicans’ last-gasp effort to repeal the Affordable Care Act hit major obstacles. Assessments that it’s “ the most radical ” push yet, along with opposition from the insurance industry, medical groups and state Medicaid officials, informed Senator John McCain’s high-impact no — not to mention a series of biting monologues by the late-night host Jimmy Kimmel . Senator Susan Collins of Maine said it was “very difficult” for her to envision voting for the bill. President Trump is now pressuring two other Republican senators , Rand Paul of Kentucky and Lisa Murkowski of Alaska, but the majority leader, Mitch McConnell, faces dimmed prospects of securing passage before the week’s end, when rules allowing approval by a simple majority expire. ____ Image Credit Jim Wilson/The New York Times 7. As Facebook faces growing scrutiny over its role in last November’s presidential election, so does its founder, Mark Zuckerberg — now seen by some as a reactor, not a visionary — for creating a force his company can’t fully control . The social network said it was turning over more than 3,000 Russia-linked ads to congressional committees. We took a broad look at how pressure from some world governments has forced Facebook — and other platforms — to adjust their operations, effectively Balkanizing the promise of an anything-goes internet . ____ Image Credit Ivor Prickett for The New York Times 8. The special counsel investigating Russian meddling in the U.S. presidential election, Robert Mueller, asked the White House for documents about some of President Trump’s most scrutinized actions , like his meeting with Russian officials in May and the firing of the F.B.I. director James Comey. And Paul Manafort , the former Trump campaign chairman at the center of the investigations, turned up in an unexpected arena: helping administer Iraqi Kurds ’ referendum tomorrow on independence, a vote the U.S. opposes as destabilizing. Above, Iraqi Kurds at a rally. ____ Image Credit Tom Brenner/The New York Times 9. Back on Capitol Hill, Senate Republicans, under mounting pressure to score a legislative win, agreed to move forward on a budget that would add to the federal deficit in order to pave the way for a $1.5 trillion tax cut over the next 10 years. More details are expected to be released this week by a group of Republican congressional leaders and the White House economic team. And in Alabama, the Republican race for the Senate seat vacated by Jeff Sessions goes to a runoff Tuesday that will serve as something of a proxy war between President Trump and his former strategist, Stephen Bannon . Either Mr. Trump’s choice, Senator Luther Strange, above, or Mr. Bannon’s, Justice Roy Moore, will take on Doug Jones, a Democrat, on Dec. 12. ____ Image Credit Kien Hoang Le for The New York Times 10. In Germany, another consequential vote today is expected to keep Chancellor Angela Merkel for a fourth term , but also to give a far-right party seats in the federal Parliament for the first time since World War II. In contrast with the U.S., blue-collar strongholds are providing a bulwark against populism. Above, a water-pump plant in Dortmund. Here’s our guide to the vote . ____ Image Credit Andrew Testa for The New York Times 11. A quick look at the economy: The Federal Reserve, confident that the U.S. has emerged safely from the 2008 financial meltdown, will begin to unwind its stimulus program . But economists warn that the enormous power of giant corporations may be stifling new entrepreneurship , and holding back wages and productivity. Uber, possibly the most famous start-up in recent years, lost its license to operate in London . And our personal finance columnist tells the inside story of dealing with Equifax — and hundreds of worried readers — after the company’s colossal security breach. ____ Image Credit Mark Neville for The New York Times 12. Finally, our magazine followed the vacations of families around the world as they embarked on voyages within their homelands — stories punctuated by stunning photographs. The reporter finds that domestic travel evokes a powerful nostalgia for one’s home, a connection outsiders may not feel. And for one last dose of hopeful news: The world’s population of sea turtles is rebounding . Have a great week. _____ Your Weekend Briefing is published Sundays at 6 a.m. Eastern. And don’t miss Your Morning Briefing , weekdays at 6 a.m. Eastern, and Your Evening Briefing , weeknights at 6 p.m. Eastern. Want to look back? You can browse past Morning and Evening Briefings . If photographs appear out of order, please download the updated New York Times app from iTunes or Google Play . What did you like? What do you want to see here? Let us know at briefing@nytimes.com . Related Coverage Republican Party, North Korea, Hurricane Maria: Your Friday Evening Briefing Sept. 22, 2017 Image Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              