   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Opinion Supported by Talking Apocalypse With My Son By  Mimi Swartz Jan. 15, 2018 Image Credit Anders Nilsen I had forgotten what it was like to live daily with terror until my 26-year-old son started sending me existential texts. “Are we living in a PCP-laced version of the Cold War era?” Sam asked me recently, in the wake of another mine-is-bigger-than-yours debate between President Trump and North Korea’s leader, Kim Jong-un — the exchange followed by the Hawaiian missile attack that wasn’t. “Literally with every passing day I get A) less worried about paying my student loans and B) more serious about buying a grill guard for the car,” he continued. Why a grill guard? I had to ask. To be ready to drive through the police state’s police barricades, he explained. Such is the status of our mother-son discourse in the Trump era. Our Obama years were far less apocalyptic. Sam and I talked about his fluctuating college grades, Scions versus Hondas and why he still refused to revisit the restaurant where he worked as a busboy at 15. We had political discussions, but they mostly served as Good Parenting Payoffs, since we were usually on the same side of most issues. Now my historically sunny son has a pretty dark vision of things. “Every day something enrages me … Love Trumps Hate? Like, where?” he asked me the other day. Sam has worked in public health since high school, and so has tried his best to mitigate the inequities and inequalities that have been spreading like poison ivy for most of his life. Mr. Trump’s campaign rhetoric disturbed him; his victory left him disgusted. As a mother who prides herself on possessing a skeptical but unshakable patriotism, this has been hard to take. Sure, I can chalk up some of Sam’s cynicism to youthful hyperbole, but at this point — Mr. Kim coupled with the imminent destruction of the Affordable Care Act, DACA kids’ uncertain futures, tax “reform” that will cost us — I can’t counter without sounding like someone who has lost her marbles. “This, too, will pass” sounds pretty weak when I’m texting Sam the location of his parents’ wills. I guess I should be grateful to Mr. Trump. After all, he has forced me to take responsibility for my mortality, but why did this task have to include thoughts of where my small family should meet in the wake of a nuclear catastrophe? Sam is in New York, and we are in Texas. Does it really make sense to designate my in-laws’ cottage on the Potomac our safe space? It would take us a long time to get there on foot from Houston once the gas runs out, and if the cell towers are down — well, you get the idea. Sadly, this kind of thinking is not new to me. I was a second grader during the Cuban missile crisis and spent much of my childhood terrified that a Russian-launched nuclear attack was imminent. The threat was real, as inescapable in those days as the weather. Downtown buildings in my hometown, San Antonio, displayed yellow and black circular signs designating directions to air-raid shelters. My elementary-school classes practiced duck-and-cover drills, which did nothing more than compound our dread. We moved into a new house that came equipped with a bomb shelter in the basement. Its walls were reinforced with concrete, and it had an air pump powered by a hand crank. The thick wooden door had a peephole that was about three inches across, clearly built by someone who knew more about keeping out the neighbors than the effects of radiation. What scared me most during those days, though, was the noon siren. It was just signaling the hour, of course, but sometimes, when I was lost in play outside at the height of a Texas summer, that long, loud wail would send me sprinting toward the safety of the house, heart pounding like a rabbit who had barely escaped a hunter’s first shot. What did my parents do then? I don’t remember, a fact that suggests I either didn’t share my fears or they thought it best to continue to live as though Armageddon wasn’t just around the corner. Fortunately, it wasn’t, and my fears faded. Yes, the first and second World Trade Center attacks revived my paranoia. But despite George W. Bush’s zombielike reading of “The Pet Goat” to elementary-school children while the towers burned, I held on to the belief that even if the president was lost, his associates and various government agencies were not. This was a little self-deceptive — the Sept. 11 hijackers had been on watchlists, as I recall — but we still managed to avoid any more catastrophes on our shores. But now we have a president who baits foreign leaders who share his propensity for brinkmanship, and I have a son who doesn’t really believe in the future — not just his own, but that of his country. He doesn’t see a community of people who can put aside their differences for a greater good, and he doesn’t see anyone on the horizon who can allay his fears, even me. I got nothin’. Mimi Swartz, an executive editor at Texas Monthly, is a contributing opinion writer.  Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter (@NYTopinion) , and sign up for the Opinion Today newsletter . A version of this article appears in print on , on Page A 21 of the New York edition with the headline: Talking Apocalypse With My Son . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              