   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Weddings Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Kathryn Sugar, Julia Cohen Oct. 9, 2016 Kathryn Ward Sugar, the daughter of Jill Moore Sugar and Dr. Jeffrey P. Sugar of San Diego, was married Oct. 8 to Julia Palmer Cohen, the daughter of Dr. Leslie A. Rodnan and Dr. John B. Cohen of Washington. Robbie Mantel, a friend of the couple who became a Universal Life minister for the occasion, officiated at Tribeca Rooftop, an event space in Manhattan. Ms. Sugar , 26, is a seventh-grade English teacher at Brooklyn Prospect Charter School. She graduated from California Polytechnic State University in San Luis Obispo, and received a master’s degree in fine arts from Columbia. Her poetry has been published in Boston Review in 2014 and Lumina Journal in 2015. Her father is an urgent care physician with the Sharp Rees-Stealy Medical Group in San Diego. Her mother, who is retired, was the local sales manager at KFMB-TV, the CBS affiliate in San Diego. Ms. Cohen, 29, is an assistant district attorney in the appeals division in the Manhattan district attorney’s office. She graduated from Wesleyan and received her law degree from the University of Pennsylvania. Her father, who is retired, was an orthopedic surgeon in Washington. Her mother, who is retired, was a pediatrician at Children’s National Medical Center in Washington; she is volunteering in the pediatric transgender unit. The couple met through OkCupid in August 2012. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page ST 18 of the New York edition with the headline: Kathryn Sugar,  Julia Cohen . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              