   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Weddings Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Abby Animashaun, Chimaobi Amutah Image Larry Long Oct. 8, 2017 Abiola Abike Animashaun and Dr. Chimaobi Obilo Amutah are to be married Oct. 8 at the DoubleTree by Hilton in Danvers, Mass. Gene Corbin, a friend of the couple, who was previously ordained a Baptist minister, is to officiate. On Oct. 7, the couple and their families participated in a ceremony involving Nigerian wedding traditions. Ms. Animashaun, 30, is known as Abby. She was, until last week, a policy analyst at Commonwealth Medicine’s Center for Health Law and Economics in Shrewsbury, Mass. Later this month, she will begin work as a program officer at the Center for Health Care Strategies in Hamilton, N.J., a health care policy nonprofit organization. She graduated from Wellesley and received a Master of Public Health from Emory. She is a daughter of Adetoun Biodun Staveley-Animashaun and Tajudeen Babatunde Animashaun of Malden, Mass. The bride’s father is a property manager at Jones Lang LaSalle in Cambridge, Mass. Her mother is a geriatric case manager for Central Boston Elderly Services. Mr. Amutah, 32, is the statewide data manager for the Office of Comprehensive Support at the New Jersey Department of Education in Trenton, N.J., where he also serves as the program director for school improvement grants. He graduated from Harvard and received a master's degree in curriculum and instruction from the University of Mississippi and a Doctor of Education from Rutgers, with a concentration in education, culture and society. He is a son of Abigail Nwodochi Amutah of Trenton and Solomon C. Amutah of Reading, Pa. The groom’s mother is a financial analyst at the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection in Trenton. His father retired as a computer teacher at Samuel B. Huey Elementary School in Philadelphia. The couple met through Facebook in 2005, then, in person, two years later at a party in Cambridge hosted by Mr. Amutah and his roommates. For the next seven years, the couple remained long-distance friends. They did not meet again until 2014 in Chelsea, Mass., when they finally went on their first date. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page ST 16 of the New York edition with the headline: Abby Animashaun Chimaobi Amutah . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              