   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Weddings Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Sophie Buonomo, Patrick Duffy Image July 19, 2015 Sophie Koven Buonomo, the daughter of Dr. Suzanne J. Koven and Dr. Carlo Buonomo of Concord, Mass., is to be married Sunday to Patrick Boyle Duffy, a son of Christine B. Murphy of Everett, Wash., and Richard M. Duffy of Springfield, Va. Rabbi Rayzel Raphael is to officiate at Congress Hall, a hotel in Cape May, N.J. The bride, 27, who will take her husband’s name, is a summer associate at the New York office of the law firm Hogan Lovells. She graduated magna cum laude from Boston University and in August is to begin her third year of studies toward a law degree at the Benjamin N. Cardozo School of Law at Yeshiva University in New York. Her father is a radiologist at Boston Children’s Hospital and an associate professor of radiology at Harvard Medical School. Her mother is a primary care physician and writer in residence in the division of general internal medicine at Massachusetts General Hospital. She is also an assistant professor of medicine at Harvard Medical School. The groom, 28, is a fourth-grade teacher in New York at Public School 19. He graduated from Five Towns College in Dix Hills, N.Y., and received a master’s in education from Metropolitan College of New York. His mother is a health care aide in Everett for Catholic Community Services of Western Washington. His father is a data analyst for Freddie Mac in McLean, Va. The groom is a stepson of Michele Duell. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page ST 15 of the New York edition with the headline: Sophie Buonomo, Patrick Duffy . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              