   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Weddings Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Rachel Morris, Samuel Bruce May 17, 2015 Dr. Rachel Emily Morris and Samuel Henry Bruce are to be married on Sunday at the New York Botanical Garden in the Bronx. Rabbi Felicia L. Sol is to perform the ceremony. Dr. Morris, 33, is an attending physician in the department of emergency medicine at Forest Hills Hospital in Queens. She graduated with honors from Wesleyan University and received her medical degree from Drexel University College of Medicine. She is the daughter of Alice K. Morris and Dr. Jeffrey B. Morris of Medford, N.J. The bride’s father is the chairman of emergency medicine at Virtua Memorial Hospital in Mount Holly, N.J. Her mother retired as a social worker for the Haddon Heights School District in Haddon Heights, N.J. Mr. Bruce, 32, is a second-year law student at the City University of New York. He graduated from the College of William & Mary and received a master’s in forensic psychology from John Jay College of Criminal Justice. He is a volunteer emergency medical technician with the Central Park Medical Unit. He is a son of Deborah R. Bruce and David A. Bruce of Manassas, Va. The groom’s mother is a librarian with the Prince William County public library system in Virginia. His father retired as a program engineer for Lockheed Martin in Manassas. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page ST 17 of the New York edition with the headline: Rachel Morris,  Samuel Bruce . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              