   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Science Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Science Bookshelf Best Selling Science Books By  The New York Times Sept. 8, 2014 1 IN THE KINGDOM OF ICE by Hampton Sides. Doubleday. An 1879 polar voyage gone terribly wrong. 2 QUIET by Susan Cain. Crown. Introverts — one-third of the United States population — are undervalued. (2) 3 THE HOT ZONE by Richard Preston. Anchor. The discovery of the Ebola virus, and the efforts to keep it from spreading; first published in 1994. 4 DAVID AND GOLIATH by Malcolm Gladwell. Little, Brown. How disadvantages can work in our favor, from the author of “The Tipping Point” and “Outliers”. (1) 5 THINKING, FAST AND SLOW by Daniel Kahneman. Farrar, Straus and Giroux. The winner of a Nobel in economic science discusses how we make choices in business and personal life and when we can and cannot trust our intuitions. (4) 6 THE POWER OF HABIT by Charles Duhigg. Random House. A Times reporter’s account of the science behind forming habits, and breaking them. (3) 7 THE ORGANIZED MIND by Daniel J. Levitin. Dutton. A professor draws on research in neuroscience to explain how organization can help us manage information in our lives. 8 THE IMMORTAL LIFE OF HENRIETTA LACKS by Rebecca Skloot. Crown. The story of an African-American woman whose cancerous cells were cultured without her permission in 1951. (5) 9 THE SMARTEST KIDS IN THE WORLD by Amanda Ripley. Simon & Schuster. High-performing schools in Finland, South Korea and Poland, seen through the eyes of American high school students abroad. 10 WORKING STIFF by Judy Melinek and T. J. Mitchell. Scribner. A memoir of a young forensic pathologist’s “rookie season” as a New York City medical examiner. 11 THINKING IN NUMBERS by Daniel Tammet. Back Bay/Little, Brown. Essays about mathematical theory and practice illuminate how numbers and equations underpin life, love and the search for meaning. 12 KILL OR CURE by Steve Parker. DK Publishing. An illustrated history of medicine. 13 MOON SHOT by Alan B. Shepard and Deke Slayton with Jay Barbree. Open Road. An inside story of America’s race to the moon; first published in 1994. 14 A MIND FOR NUMBERS by Barbara Oakley. Tarcher/Penguin. Retooling the brain with creative approaches, so that it may effectively learn science and math at any age. 15 HOW NOT TO BE WRONG by Jordan Ellenberg. Penguin Press. A mathematician shows how his discipline helps us think about problems of politics, medicine and commerce. (6) 16 DOCTORED by Sandeep Jauhar. Farrar, Straus and Giroux. The issues in American medicine through the eyes of an attending cardiologist in New York City; reviewed on this page. 17 SUPERINTELLIGENCE by Nick Bostrom. Oxford University. An Oxford University futurist considers how we might keep machines with superior intelligence from getting the upper hand. 18 THE WHERE, THE WHY, AND THE HOW by Jenny Volvovski, Julia Rothman and Matt Lamothe. Chronicle. Mysteries of the natural world explained by scientists and illustrated by 75 contemporary artists. 19 THE GIRLS OF ATOMIC CITY by Denise Kiernan. Simon & Schuster. Thousands of women took well-paid jobs in Oak Ridge, Tenn., during World War II, not knowing that the government project where they worked was enriching uranium for the first atomic bomb. 20 BLUE MIND by Wallace J. Nichols. Little, Brown. Proximity to water — whether the sea, a swimming pool, fishbowl or even represented in art — reinforces human well-being and bodily functions. The titles ranked here are selected by the science editors from all adult nonfiction books reported to The New York Times for the month. These titles are fundamentally based on the sciences; those for which science is more tangential or peripheral are generally excluded. Rankings reflect combined print and e-book sales for August 2014. An asterisk (*) indicates that a book’s sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above. A dagger (†) indicates that some bookstores report receiving bulk orders. More information on rankings and methodology: nytimes.com/science.  A version of this article appears in print on , on Page D 6 of the New York edition with the headline: Science Best Sellers . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Related Coverage Science Bookshelf: Methodology April 15, 2013 Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              