   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Business Day Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Financial Ties Between Doctors and Health Care Firms Are Detailed By  Katie Thomas and Rachel Abrams Oct. 2, 2014 For some doctors, treating patients isn’t the only way to make money. A Michigan plastic surgeon was paid more than $300,000 to travel the world teaching doctors about new cosmetic products like a breast implant. The retired chief executive of the Mayo Clinic, who once helped write its conflict of interest policy, received more than $237,000 in compensation for serving on multiple corporate boards. And a Florida cardiologist took a payment of more than $100,000 from a device maker, a connection that he did not disclose when he mentioned one of the company’s products in a research article. In just five months at the end of last year, doctors and other health care professionals made more than $212 million on speaking and consulting engagements for drug and device makers, according to data released on Tuesday by the federal government. The vast database, which was required under the new health care law, is likely to be closely scrutinized by researchers, insurers, consumer advocates and others. Although the data has mistakes and shortcomings, it sheds light on the often murky financial ties between physicians and the health care industry. While the typical doctor earned only about $1,750 from August to December 2013, a more elite group brought in considerably more for such activities, the data shows. At least 130 doctors, out of about 32,000 named in the database, earned more than $100,000. The database did not include the names of about 40 percent of the payment records because the federal government is still trying to verify their accuracy. Image Dr. David Kessler, an F.D.A. commissioner in the 1990s. Credit Ben Margot/Associated Press Although the database also includes payments for research, royalties and other activities, ethicists particularly scrutinize the money doled out for speaking and consulting payments. They argue that these relationships can influence prescribing behavior and negatively affect patients, especially when such ties are lucrative. “Social scientists will tell you that any amount of money will influence people, but I think larger sums can influence behavior more,” said Dr. Aaron S. Kesselheim, an associate professor of medicine at Harvard Medical School and Brigham and Women’s Hospital. The list of doctors who earned more than $100,000 in speaking and consulting fees includes practitioners of diverse backgrounds and interests who were paid by drug and device makers for a variety of reasons. Dr. David Kessler, who was the commissioner of the Food and Drug Administration in the 1990s, was paid more than $200,000; the money, he said, was for serving on the board of Aptalis, a pharmaceutical company that is now owned by Actavis. Some high-earning doctors were actually being paid for research, even though their fees were not recorded that way. Still others are practicing physicians who maintain busy practices and earn a secondary income traveling the country — and sometimes the world — speaking and consulting for pharmaceutical and device companies. Dr. Geoffrey H. Westrich, an orthopedic surgeon at the Hospital for Special Surgery in Manhattan, received more than $247,000 from companies that make hip, knee and spine products, including more than $100,000 from Exactech, a maker of implant devices and other surgical materials. According to his website , Dr. Westrich performs hundreds of hip and knee replacements each year. An assistant in his office said he was in surgery and was not available for an interview. Dr. James Januzzi Jr., a cardiologist at Massachusetts General Hospital in Boston, earned more than $328,000 for speaking and consulting assignments, mainly from the drug maker Boehringer Ingelheim, according to the federal data. Dr. Januzzi did not return a call and email for comment. A spokesman for Massachusetts General said that the hospital has rigorous policies requiring disclosure and review of outside activities of its staff, and that it limits the types of outside activities that it permits. Dr. Bradley Bengtson, a plastic surgeon in Grand Rapids, Mich., earned more than $300,000, mostly from Allergan, which makes a range of cosmetic surgery products, including Botox and a new breast implant, the Natrelle 410. During the five-month period covered by the new database, Dr. Bengtson traveled to San Diego, Las Vegas, Florida and Seoul, South Korea, to teach doctors how to use the new implant. He also devotes an entire page on his website to the Natrelle, which is nicknamed the “gummy bear implant” because of its glutinous consistency. Dr. Bengtson said that any time he spends not treating patients represents lost revenue, “Although to many it looks like a lot of money, it actually is about one-tenth of the money that I’m not being compensated for being out of the office,” he said. Dr. Bengtson added that a significant portion of the money was actually for research and what he described as “pass-through” money that he gave to patients for participating in studies. Like other physicians, Dr. Bengtson said he did the work mainly to help educate other doctors. “When I present, I present very transparently,” he said in an interview. But Dr. Kesselheim, of Harvard, questioned the value of company-sponsored presentations. “It provides a very narrow educational experience,” he said. It has also sometimes led to ethical lapses, where doctors with financial interests in companies do not fully disclose them. One high-earning doctor, Dr. Barry Weinstock of Leesburg, Fla., did not disclose a payout of more than $100,000 in a recent journal article. He received the money in August 2013 after a company that he had invested in, Idev Technologies, was acquired by the device company Abbott. In September of last year, Dr. Weinstock, a cardiologist, submitted an article to a medical journal in which he briefly mentioned an Idev product, the Supera stent, in a favorable light. Image Barry Weinstock, a cardiologist, did not disclose a payment in a journal article. Dr. Weinstock did disclose his ties to two other products that were more prominently mentioned in the article, in Vascular Disease. But he said that he did not believe he needed to mention the payout from Idev because he mentioned its product only in passing. “I was not advocating the use of the Supera stent,” he said in an interview, referring to the Idev product. “It was merely mentioned in the background of the article, and I wasn’t actually suggesting that anybody use it.” Some medical ethicists said that although Dr. Weinstock’s failure to disclose his tie was a minor one, he most likely should have mentioned it. Bill Norton, the president of HMP Communications, which publishes the journal, said Dr. Weinstock did not disclose the connection. After he was contacted by a reporter, he said that he had investigated the issue and was correcting the disclosure. Dr. Weinstock also speaks and consults for a range of companies, including the device companies W. L. Gore, Boston Scientific and the drug maker Eli Lilly. Like Dr. Bengtson, he said he lost money when he gave speeches, but he acknowledged that it carried other benefits. “For your own personal career and your own practice, there’s a benefit to being viewed as someone who is an expert and leader in the field,” he said. Another doctor, Michael B. Wood, the former chief executive of the Mayo Clinic Foundation, earned more than $237,000 last year from serving on the boards of two separate medical companies. Dr. Wood, who helped draft some of Mayo’s conflict of interest policies when he was chief executive, retired about a decade ago and still works occasionally in Mayo’s Jacksonville, Fla., clinic. “Anytime I was asked to be on a public board, I turned it down until I was retired,” he said in an interview. Dr. Wood also said that the payment data in the federal database sounded “a little high.” Mayo has tightened its rules in recent years about how much employees can earn from outside board positions after hearing reports of potential conflicts at other health care institutions, according to Dr. Richard L. Ehman, a professor of radiology who helps oversee Mayo’s conflict of interest policies. “We’re constantly revisiting our policies in light of what we’re seeing,” he said. Sarah Cohen and Agustin Armendariz contributed reporting.  A version of this article appears in print on , on Page B 1 of the New York edition with the headline: Financial Ties Between Doctors and Health Care Firms Detailed . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Related Coverage Detailing Financial Links of Doctors and Drug Makers Sept. 30, 2014 Image Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              