   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Weddings Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Stephen Billick, Bruce Yolton May 25, 2014 Dr. Stephen Bates Billick and David Bruce Yolton were married Tuesday evening at L’Église Française du St. Esprit, a French church in New York. The Rt. Rev. Mark S. Sisk, the former Episcopal bishop of New York, performed the ceremony, with the Rev. Nigel J. Massey, an Episcopal priest and the rector of the church, taking part. Dr. Billick, 67, is a psychiatrist in New York. He is also a clinical professor of psychiatry at New York University School of Medicine and New York Medical College, and a lecturer in psychiatry at Columbia. He was president of the American Academy of Psychiatry and the Law from October 2009 to October 2010. He graduated from Yale and received a medical degree from the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill. He is a son of the late Esther B. Billick and the late William J. Billick, who lived in Titusville, Fla. Mr. Yolton, 55, is known as Bruce. He is a vice president for information technology at Macmillan Publishers in New York. He graduated from the University of Pennsylvania. He is the son of Katherine P. Yolton of Oak Bluffs, Mass., and L. William Yolton of Bradenton, Fla. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page ST 18 of the New York edition with the headline: Stephen Billick, Bruce Yolton . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              