   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Opinion Supported by Letters Using Genetics to Improve Medicine Feb. 6, 2015 Image Credit Jed McGowan To the Editor: Re “ ‘Moonshot’ Medicine Will Let Us Down ” (Op-Ed, Jan. 29): Michael J. Joyner asserts that precision medicine, an exciting field of research that combines genomics and digital data to target treatments for diseases, “is unlikely to make most of us healthier.” We think he’s wrong. Precision medicine aims to pinpoint the handful of genes that actually drive disease. For example, scientists are identifying specific genes that drive tumor growth and are developing drugs to target those mutations. About 5 percent of patients with non-small-cell lung cancer have ALK mutations and can benefit from treatment with Xalkori. Much progress has already occurred to make the treatment of disease more precise, and the genetic frontier is still wide open. Precision medicine takes into account a variety of individual risk factors, including genetics and the undeniable impact of a person’s lifestyle choices and environment. If tailoring treatments to specific patients is a “moonshot,” then it’s one that will stimulate innovation, enrich our understanding of disease and save lives. LAURIE H. GLIMCHER STEVEN J. CORWIN New York Dr. Glimcher is dean of Weill Cornell Medical College. Dr. Corwin is chief executive of NewYork-Presbyterian Hospital. To the Editor: Suggesting that precision medicine won’t work is like suggesting that Thomas Edison ought to have given up after his first attempts at a light bulb. Each human genome is exquisitely complicated. We can sequence it, but we hardly know everything we’ll find in it. We know for certain that in some people their sequence harbors the answer for how to successfully treat otherwise devastating disease. Now we need to scale this, collaboratively and thoughtfully. That is what precisely what President Obama’s initiative will support. ROBERT B. DARNELL President and Scientific Director New York Genome Center New York To the Editor: Re “ ‘Moonshot’ Medicine Will Let Us Down”: It already has. In the decade since searching began for disease-related genetic “glitches,” thousands of such changes have been “associated” with diseases, that is, a statistically significant effect was found. But the effect itself is usually negligible. As Dr. Michael J. Joyner notes, having the glitch barely raises the risk for the disease. Part of the problem is the glitch-finding method; it has nothing to do with disease inheritance. This was illustrated in a recent scientific paper on autism, highlighted in your Jan. 27 article “ More Differences Than Similarities Are Found in Autistic Siblings .” The researchers examined previously reported genetic glitches and tested how many pairs of autistic siblings shared the glitches. Only 30 percent did, which indicates to me that the autism-associated glitches had little to do with the inheritance of autism. If we want to understand actual genetics of human disease, we need to expand our horizons beyond “risk factors” and supposed genetic glitches and return to studying family inheritance. DAVID A. GREENBERG Columbus, Ohio The writer is a neurogeneticist. To the Editor: Precision medicine is not predictive medicine. It does not attempt to use genetics to predict the likelihood that someone will develop a disease in the future. Precision medicine uses the genetic makeup of a patient who already has a disease, such as cancer, to try to understand what are the molecular causes behind it. This knowledge can be used to determine what drugs will and will not work, and end up reducing costs and providing more effective therapies. It can also improve the success rate of clinical trials if you can test drugs only on patients who are likely to benefit. While it is important not to oversell the short-term benefits of medical research, the long-term benefits are indisputable. CARLOS S. MORENO Atlanta The writer is an associate professor in the department of pathology and laboratory medicine at the Winship Cancer Institute of Emory University. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page A 18 of the New York edition with the headline: Using Genetics to Improve Medicine . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              