   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Weddings Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Meghal Shah, Shaan-Chirag Gandhi Image April 1, 2018 Meghal Bipin Shah and Dr. Shaan-Chirag Chandrahas Gandhi were married March 31 at the Ritz-Carlton, Sarasota, in Sarasota, Fla. Pandit Jinit Bhatt, a Hindu priest, officiated during a Jain ceremony. Mrs. Gandhi, 32, is an associate in the tax credit transactions practice in the Boston office of Holland & Knight, a law firm based in Florida. She graduated from N.Y.U. and received a law degree from Boston College. She is a daughter of Ketki B Shah and Dr. Bipin D. Shah of Fort Myers, Fla. The bride’s father is an obstetrician and gynecologist there with the Lee Physician Group. Her mother is a vice president on the Lee Memorial Auxiliary at the HealthPark Medical Center, also in Fort Myers. Dr. Gandhi, also 32, is a resident physician in internal medicine at the Massachusetts General Hospital in Boston. In June, he is to start as principal at the Longwood Fund, a health care venture capital firm in Boston. Also in June, he is to begin working as an attending hospital medicine physician at Massachusetts General and an instructor in medicine at Harvard Medical School. He graduated from Case Western Reserve University in Cleveland, and received a D.Phil. in medical oncology from the University of Oxford, where he was a Rhodes scholar. He also received a medical degree and an M.B.A. from Harvard. He is the son of Kalpana C. O. Gandhi and Chandrahas O. Gandhi of Battle Creek, Mich. The groom’s mother is a retired sonographer there. His father is an industrial engineering consultant, also in Battle Creek. The couple met in 2015 through the dating app Hinge. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page ST 12 of the New York edition with the headline: Meghal Shah,  Shaan-Chirag Gandhi . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              