   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Weddings Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Whitney Keefe, David Snider Image Credit Michael Falco/Christian Oth Studio Dec. 11, 2016 Dr. Whitney Margaret Keefe, a daughter of Hillary R. Mankin-Kufe and Dr. Donald W. Kufe of Wellesley, Mass., was married Dec. 10 to David Andrew Snider, a son of Jody B. Snider and Andrew E. Snider of Boston. Laurie L. Schaffran, a friend of the groom’s family who was ordained by American Marriage Ministries for the occasion, officiated at the New York Public Library’s main branch. The bride, 31, is an associate director of business development at Celgene Corporation, a biopharmaceutical company in Summit, N.J. She graduated with honors from Brown and has a medical degree from Tufts. She also received an M.B.A. with highest distinction from Harvard. Her father is a professor of medicine at Harvard Medical School, and a distinguished physician at the Dana-Farber Cancer Institute in Boston, where the bride’s mother is senior counsel. The groom, also 31, is the chief operating officer and the chief financial officer of Compass, a real estate brokerage firm based in New York. He graduated from Duke and received an M.B.A. from Harvard. His mother is an executive producer at Viewpoint Creative, an advertising agency in Newton, Mass. His father is the president of a management consultancy in Boston that bears his name. The couple met on a blind date in February 2012 when they were both students in Boston. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page ST 25 of the New York edition with the headline: Whitney Keefe,  David Snider . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              