   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index U.S. Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Robert Spitzer, 83, Dies; Psychiatrist Set Rigorous Standards for Diagnosis Image Dr. Robert L. Spitzer was a major architect of the modern classification of mental illnesses in the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders. Credit Alex di Suvero for The New York Times By  Benedict Carey Dec. 26, 2015 Dr. Robert L. Spitzer, who gave psychiatry its first set of rigorous standards to describe mental disorders, providing a framework for diagnosis, research and legal judgments — as well as a lingua franca for the endless social debate over where to draw the line between normal and abnormal behavior — died on Friday in Seattle. He was 83. Dr. Spitzer died from complications of heart disease at the assisted living facility where he lived, his wife, Janet Williams, said. The couple had moved to Seattle from Princeton, N.J., this year. Dr. Spitzer’s remaking of psychiatry began with an early interest in one of the least glamorous and, historically, most ignored corners of the field: measurement. In the early 1960s, the field was fighting to sustain its credibility, in large part because diagnoses varied widely from doctor to doctor. For instance, a patient told by one doctor that he was depressed might be called anxious or neurotic by another. The field’s diagnostic manual, at the time a pamphletlike document rooted in Freudian ideas, left wide latitude for the therapist’s judgment. Dr. Spitzer, a rising star at Columbia University, was himself looking for direction, increasingly frustrated with Freudian analysis. A chance meeting with a colleague working on a new edition of the manual — the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, or the DSM — led to a job taking notes for the committee debating revisions. There he became fascinated with finding reliable means for measuring symptoms and behavior — i.e., assessment. “At the time, there was zero interest in assessment,” said Dr. Michael B. First, a professor of clinical psychiatry at Columbia. “He saw how important it was, and his whole career led to assessment being taken seriously.” One of the first behaviors Dr. Spitzer scrutinized was homosexuality, which at the time was listed in the manual as a mental disorder. Dr. Spitzer, after meeting with gay-rights advocates, began re-examining homosexuality based on whether it caused any measurable distress. The issue was extremely contentious, but in 1973, Dr. Spitzer engineered a deal by which the diagnosis was replaced by “sexual orientation disturbance,” to describe people whose sexual orientation, gay or straight, caused them distress. Gay-rights groups immediately recognized the change as a historic one, and Dr. Spitzer’s skill in orchestrating it helped him take charge of the third update of the manual, known as DSM-3. “The fact that gay marriage is allowed today is in part owed to Bob Spitzer,” said Dr. Jack Drescher, a psychoanalyst in private practice in New York who is gay. To some extent, the central question Dr. Spitzer applied to homosexuality — does it cause distress? — was the same one he used to conduct a broad re-examination of all behaviors listed as disorders. In a series of meetings, many in New York, he convened experts in each diagnostic category and sat in a corner, typing notes as they debated. Working with another researcher, Dr. Williams, who would become his wife, he produced the DSM-3, which sold surprisingly well in 1980 in the United States and abroad. It immediately set the blueprint for future manuals, using rigorously tested checklists to categorize mental problems. It also elevated its principal architect to the top of his field, where he reigned as keeper of the book for more than two decades. Dr. Spitzer wore the position as if he had been born to it, exuberantly courting controversy. He clashed with Freudian analysts, researchers, journalists and, late in his career, gay-rights advocates and psychiatrists, who helped discredit a study he had done purporting to support “reparative” therapy to alter homosexual behavior. Dr. Spitzer publicly apologized for that study in 2012 , calling it the only thing in his career that he regretted. “Bob Spitzer was by far the most influential psychiatrist of his time,” Dr. Allen J. Frances, a professor emeritus of psychiatry at Duke University and editor of a later edition of the manual, said in an email. “He saved the field and its millions of patients from a crisis of credibility, raising its scientific standards and rescuing it from the arbitrariness of warring and unsupported opinions.” Robert Leopold Spitzer was born on May 22, 1932, in White Plains, the youngest of three children of Benjamin and Esther Spitzer. His father was an engineer who invented dental materials, among other things; his mother was an accomplished pianist. The family soon moved to Manhattan, and Dr. Spitzer grew up on the Upper West Side, where he attended the Walden School. He received a bachelor’s degree in psychology from Cornell University in 1953 and an M.D. in 1957 from New York University School of Medicine. He completed a psychiatric residence at the New York State Psychiatric Institute in 1961, and in 1966 he graduated from Columbia’s Center for Psychoanalytic Training and Research. From 1980 to 2001, he won many of the field’s most prestigious awards, including one for patient care and one for teaching. A tall, lean, restless presence, he freely admitted to craving controversy and attention, and to forging relationships through debate and disagreement. “Maybe it was a New York thing, growing up here, I don’t know,” he said in an interview with The New York Times in 2012. “I was just always like that, contrary and confident.” Those qualities, combined with his outsize influence, did not sit well with many colleagues, some of whom said the DSM-3 and its successors delivered standardization at the expense of humane interviewing and intuition. “DSM has had a dehumanizing impact on the practice of psychiatry,” Dr. Nancy Andreasen, a prominent psychiatrist at the University of Iowa, wrote in 2007. “History taking — the central evaluation tool in psychiatry — has frequently been reduced to the use of DSM checklists.” Dr. Spitzer’s first two marriages ended in divorce. In addition to Dr. Williams, he is survived by five children — Laura Spitzer and Daniel Spitzer, by his second marriage, and Noah, Ezra and Gideon Spitzer-Williams, by his third — and four grandchildren. Not long before retiring from Columbia in 2003, Dr. Spitzer developed Parkinson’s disease, which progressively limited his mobility. It had no measurable effect on any other quality. During subsequent major revisions of the psychiatric manual — particularly DSM-5, published in 2013 — he loomed on the sideline like an exacting parent, issuing advice, commentary and punishing critiques. “For DSM-3, he was in every work group. He ran the entire show; he virtually wrote the thing himself” with Dr. Williams, said Dr. First, who edited DSM-4 and consulted on DSM-5. “Since then, the process has become decentralized, and people have come to realize how extremely difficult it is to get experts in this field to agree on anything.” Reprinted from Sunday’s late editions.  A version of this article appears in print on , on Page B 6 of the New York edition with the headline: Robert Spitzer, 83, Dies; Influential Psychiatrist . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              