   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Pro Football Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Giants 21, Jets 20 | Exhibition Return to Health Fuels Giants’ Victor Cruz, and Fans Image Giants receiver Victor Cruz, right, facing Jets cornerback Buster Skrine. Cruz missed most of the past two seasons with injuries. Credit Bill Kostroun/Associated Press By  Ben Shpigel Aug. 27, 2016 EAST RUTHERFORD, N.J. — Of the jersey-wearing fans at MetLife Stadium, many favored current stars from the Giants or Jets, while others, wistful for the past, modeled popular players from the glory days. The solution for the undecided, at least among Giants supporters, was to represent No. 80, which belongs to Victor Cruz. Perhaps more than anyone else on the Giants’ roster, Cruz evokes feelings of nostalgia. Once a salsa-dancing, touchdown-scoring phenomenon, Cruz missed most of the past two seasons with injuries. Returning Saturday night for his first game in 22 months, Cruz jogged onto the turf before the first series to fans cooing his surname. “Cruuuuuuuuz,” they called, and “Cruuuuuuuuz,” they called again, after the opening play of the second half, when he caught his only pass. Cruz resuscitated his career in the Giants’ 21-20 victory against the Jets, the outcome mattering far less than his health, his explosiveness and his comfort. “Everything’s great,” Cruz said. “Unscathed.” Image Giants running back Rashad Jennings, left, colliding with Jets defensive end Muhammad Wilkerson, center, in the first half. Credit Bill Kostroun/Associated Press His knee no longer bothers him, and his calf no longer throbs, and his groin no longer aches, and now, finally, he and the Giants can dream of what might be. Hardly anything else was left to the imagination Saturday in a game that strained even the lax preseason standards of watchability. Coaches hoping for offensive cohesiveness in the critical third exhibition game, before starters mostly sit out the finale, received cohesive offensiveness instead. Jets quarterback Ryan Fitzpatrick (9 of 16, 76 yards) had his passes soar and bounce, and Giants quarterback Eli Manning (10 of 15, 65 yards) bobbed and weaved behind abysmal protection. A punt block (Jets), a strip-sack fumble (Fitzpatrick) and an interception (Darrelle Revis) marred the first half, when the teams combined for 158 yards — 47 by the Giants — and 7 points. That touchdown was scored by the Jets, who gained more yards on that play, a 22-yard back-shoulder toss from Fitzpatrick to Eric Decker with 5 minutes 20 seconds remaining before halftime, than the Giants had amassed to that point. The Jets’ first-team offense, which has struggled all preseason, suffered without receiver Brandon Marshall, who was held out because of a sore hip, Coach Todd Bowles said. And yet it still fared better than the Giants, who can seize on the rhetoric that this is just the preseason. They are as grateful that these games do not count as they are that Cruz zipped around the field without distress. When Cruz ruptured his patellar tendon on Oct. 12, 2014, in Philadelphia, he was the Giants’ most reliable and productive receiver — a steady veteran who buoyed their passing offense while Odell Beckham Jr. revealed his promise. Cruz missed all of last season with a calf injury that required surgery. Finally healthy, or so he thought, he strained his groin three weeks ago, sidelining him for the first two preseason games, though he did warm up at Buffalo last Saturday. Revis, an old adversary, wandered over to greet Cruz in the first quarter. “It’s good to see you,” he told Cruz. Spending much of the first half blocking or running routes in vain, Cruz said, he kept looking at the clock, wondering if he would get a pass thrown toward him. The lone ball tossed his way, into double coverage, was nearly intercepted by Marcus Gilchrist. Cruz stayed patient, and when Manning fired a low pass into the flat, it felt to him as if the ball would never arrive. He reached down and grabbed it for a 4-yard gain. “I just wanted to see myself get open, continue to go out there and do the things that I’m accustomed, and I felt that way,” Cruz said. His return validated his rehabilitation — all of them. It also validated the Giants’ faith in him, their fervent desire to see him healthy again and contributing, combining with Beckham and the dynamic rookie Sterling Shepard to present Manning with three appealing options at receiver. Giants Coach Ben McAdoo said Cruz looked confident. Cruz said he felt comfortable. “It was just humbling,” he said. EXTRA POINTS After missing most of training camp, and the first two preseason games, with a hamstring injury, Matt Forte factored heavily into the Jets’ offense early, touching the ball on four of their first five plays. He finished with 28 yards on 10 carries and two receptions for 9 yards. … The Giants converted an interception from Christian Hackenberg into a touchdown by Tavarres King , his second of the game, to score the go-ahead points with 2 minutes 25 seconds left. Hackenberg, the Jets’ second-round pick, led an 80-yard scoring march on his first drive of the preseason. … Jets linebacker David Harris sustained a shoulder injury that Coach Todd Bowles said will require more tests Sunday. … Bryce Petty threw an interception that was returned 73 yards for a touchdown by Giants defensive end Kerry Wynn . … Two Giants players, cornerback Leon Hall and linebacker B.  J. Goodson , sustained concussions, while linebacker Jonathan Casillas injured his ribs. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page SP 10 of the New York edition with the headline: Return to Health Fuels Cruz, and Giants Fans . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Related Coverage Dallas Cowboys Quarterback Tony Romo Has a Back Fracture Aug. 27, 2016 Image Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              