   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Style Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Adult Children of AIDS Victims Take Their Memories Out of the Shadows Image At the Housing Works Bookstore Cafe in SoHo, the Recollectors online group used pictures, music and stories earlier this year to remember and honor parents of theirs who had died of AIDS. Credit David Turcotte By  J. Courtney Sullivan March 20, 2015 On a Thursday night in January, the atmosphere at the Housing Works Bookstore Cafe in SoHo was heavy with nostalgia. More than 100 people mingled, drank wine and swayed in place to hits of the ’70s and ’80s, featuring songs by Lou Reed, David Bowie, Elton John and the B-52’s. Old family photographs were projected onto a big screen: images of parents hugging their children close, or teaching them to ride a bike. Seventeen of those children were in attendance, grown now, and united by a common truth: The parents in the pictures are gone, all of them lost to AIDS. The playlist was a tribute to them, a mix of their favorite songs, as selected by the sons and daughters who traveled from as far away as Toronto, St. Louis and Los Angeles to be there. They came to share their stories, some of which had been kept secret for decades. Until recently, most never knew the others existed. They struggled with feelings of stigma and isolation. Whitney Joiner, a features editor at Marie Claire magazine, and Alysia Abbott, a journalist, brought the unlikely group together. Both lost their fathers to AIDS in 1992. Ms. Abbott was 21. Her father, an out and proud gay poet, raised her alone in San Francisco. When he told her he had contracted H.I.V., the virus that causes AIDS, she finished college early to return home and care for him. Ms. Joiner was 14. She grew up in a conservative Kentucky town. After her parents divorced, her father, who was gay, remained closeted. Her mother instructed her and her brother to tell people he had died of cancer. They rarely spoke about him from then on. A decade later, after each woman had moved to New York, Ms. Joiner confided in a co-worker about her father’s death. To her surprise, he told her that his girlfriend, Ms. Abbott (the two are now married), had lost her father in the same way. The women met for lunch soon after. “I remember feeling stunned that there was someone else out there,” Ms. Joiner said. In 2012, Ms. Abbott was working on a book called “Fairyland: A Memoir of My Father.” After learning that AIDS was the leading cause of death in men ages 18 to 45 in 1992, she and Ms. Joiner discussed how what had once seemed like an experience only the two of them shared was most likely part of something much bigger. Twenty years had passed since their fathers died. “We knew there must be a lot of people like us who were facing this anniversary,” Ms. Abbott said. “We wanted to find them.” In October, they introduced the Recollectors, an online community of adult children of parents lost to AIDS. “When AIDS first emerged in the U.S. decades ago, there was a collective cultural assumption that the disease primarily afflicted gay men who had no children,” the group’s website says. “But that was never true: men and women of all sexual identities, income levels, and cultural backgrounds contracted HIV, and in a variety of ways. Many of these people, including gay men, were survived by children.” Through Kickstarter, they raised nearly $14,000 from 235 backers. So far, the group has 92 members, from age 20 to 58. They live in 20 states, as well as Switzerland and Canada. Some were born H.I.V.-positive. In addition to the usual symptoms of grief, many Recollectors also struggle with what Ms. Abbott described as “the legacy of secrecy and how it twists you.” The group views storytelling as a form of activism — correcting a false narrative and reclaiming their shared past. They aim to build a printed and oral history of their experiences. Some share stories and photos at therecollectors.com and on the group’s public Facebook page . Many more are active on only its private Facebook page. “One of the things that brings the Recollectors together is how we suffered from the closet more than we suffered from the disease,” said Marco Roth, a founder of n+1, a print and digital magazine of literature, culture and politics, and the author of the memoir “The Scientists: A Family Romance.” Image Members of the Recollectors, from left, Alysia Abbott, Reed Vreeland, Whitney Joiner, Mathew Rodriguez and Sara Rafsky, speaking at the Housing Works Bookstore Cafe. Credit David Turcotte At the Housing Works event, Mr. Roth read from an essay he wrote for the Recollectors site. The crowd listened intently. There were nods and sighs of recognition. Many members have been yearning for the sense of understanding that comes only with shared experience. Mr. Roth, who now lives in Philadelphia, was a 14-year-old Manhattan prep-school student when his father, a doctor, told him he had contracted H.I.V. through an accident at work. Mr. Roth and his mother were forbidden from telling anyone. Though they still have a hard time talking about the past, his mother went to Housing Works to lend her support. Mr. Roth’s young daughter was there, too, quietly reading the second book in the “Divergent” series in the children’s section. Viviana Maldonado flew in from Los Angeles, where she works in risk management. Her father, a Mexican immigrant who was a Baptist preacher in Nebraska, died in 2003. She was 21. Since her father received his diagnosis, Ms. Maldonado had searched in vain for others like herself. When she met the Recollectors, she said: “I was very quiet at first. I was just taking it all in. I was thinking to myself, I’m in New York City with the people I’ve been looking for for 20 years.” She recognized Crystal Gamet, who runs a housekeeping cooperative in Maine, from Facebook. “I immediately went up to her and introduced myself,” Ms. Maldonado said later. “I told her she could sit by me, and we ordered drinks together. I felt so drawn to her and connected.” The two keep in touch. For Sara Rafsky, the problem wasn’t that she had no one to talk with, but that she was simply too distraught to talk. Her father, Bob Rafsky, was a key member of the AIDS advocacy group Act Up. She knew he was considered a hero. During Gov. Bill Clinton’s 1992 presidential run, Mr. Rafsky famously interrupted him at a campaign event to ask what he would do about AIDS, prompting an impassioned and angry response from the governor. When Mr. Rafsky died the next year, his daughter was 7. President Clinton sent her a condolence letter. Ms. Rafsky said that she never experienced shame about her father’s sexuality or his illness. Still, she said, “For 20 years, I battled my grief in the shadows.” In the 2012 documentary “How to Survive a Plague,” scenes that show Mr. Rafsky attending demonstrations and sit-ins are interspersed with home-movie footage of him dancing and blowing out birthday candles with his daughter. At the film’s premiere, Ms. Rafsky met some of her father’s fellow Act Up activists. One of them, Peter Staley, recalled: “I had all this history with Bob Rafsky. All of a sudden, here was his beautiful adult daughter. She looked so much like him. She knew him as a father, but not an activist. I could tell her about that part of his life.” Mr. Staley and other Act Up members have become like surrogate fathers to Ms. Rafsky and other Recollectors. Ms. Rafsky calls them her uncles. They were at Housing Works, beaming like proud parents. The connection between the men who survived and the children of those who did not has had a profound effect on both sides. During the worst years of the AIDS epidemic, Mr. Staley said, families often swooped in after a death, seizing assets, planning memorials that didn’t mention AIDS and pushing friends and lovers away. “There was a real fear of how straight families were handling this,” he said. “The kids got lost in that.” But, he added: “We all went through the plague years. Many of us are only processing it now. We’re doing that together.” Mr. Staley said he was “completely in awe” of the Recollectors. He credits them with helping to keep the story of AIDS present and relevant in a culture that has largely grown apathetic to the issue. The night after the Housing Works event, group members gathered for a private dinner at Ms. Joiner’s apartment. “It was not a sad or maudlin night, but a comforting one,” Ms. Joiner said. “I felt like we were all siblings in a way.” She and others have noticed that their new openness has caused a chain reaction in their families. Ms. Joiner persuaded her mother and brother to watch “How to Survive a Plague.” Over Christmas, they opened a storage unit of her father’s belongings that had been locked for 22 years. “After a lifetime of feeling like I wasn’t supposed to remember him,” she said, “my father has been brought back.” The Recollectors are partnering with StoryCorps, a nonprofit oral-history group, to bring some of their stories to National Public Radio. They have plans for more meet-ups, and hope to add an educational component to their mission, teaching young people about the history of AIDS in America. As their numbers grow, Ms. Joiner said, “It’s still so surprising and emotional whenever we get an email saying, ‘I’m one of you.’ ” A version of this article appears in print on , on Page ST 1 of the New York edition with the headline: Shining Light Where Shadows Once Fell . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              