   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index The Learning Network Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Current Events Conversation Texting-While-Walking, Social Life and Haunted Houses: Our Favorite Student Comments of the Week Image Texting while walking in San Francisco’s Union Square neighborhood. Credit Christie Hemm Klok for The New York Times By  The Learning Network Nov. 2, 2017 Thanks to our Halloween writing prompts , this week students terrified us with some scary stories, but also entertained us with thoughts on whether or not they would dress up their pets for the holiday. Along with those, you weighed in on texting laws, the role of sports in your life, whether you spend enough time with other people, what animal you’re most like, and more. A special shout out goes to students in Wilmington, N.C., Locust Grove, Ga., and King of Prussia, Penn., who contributed to many conversations this week. What are you reading, watching or listening to in The Times right now? Add a comment on this post and let us know, or choose one of our recent writing prompts and weigh in. Please note: All student comments have been lightly edited for length, but otherwise appear just as they were originally submitted. _________ Image Dyshon Sims and Georgia (8-0) already have a win over Notre Dame on their playoff résumé. If the Bulldogs win out, they could face Alabama in the Southeastern Conference championship game. Credit Joe Robbins/Getty Images In response to our weekly suggestion for students to chose their own articles as prompts, Renee Joynes Wilmington, N.C. was inspired by “ Georgia Tops First College Football Playoff Rankings ,” and wrote: As stated in the title, Georgia edged out Alabama for the top spot, with Notre Dame and Clemson, 3rd and 4th, respectively, rounding out the teams that would make the playoffs if the season were to end today. Oklahoma (5) and Ohio State (6) are still in the hunt, with a combined two losses. Personally I believe Alabama is a better football team than Georgia, mainly due to their success recently under head coach Nick Saban, winning four of the last eight national championships. The author did a good job of explaining why the Playoff Ranking Committee placed Georgia above Alabama, saying “the playoff selection committee judged Georgia to be the superior team at this point in the season, at a time when the Bulldogs have played two ranked teams — including at Notre Dame — while the Crimson Tide have faced none.” Since both teams are undefeated at this point, strength of schedule really becomes important. The Irish and Tigers are both 7-1, with Notre Dame losing to Georgia at home in week two by one point and Clemson losing to unranked Syracuse. _________ Image Pedestrians on Hotel Street at Fort Street Mall in Honolulu. Honolulu enacted a law, set to take effect Wednesday, that allows the police to fine pedestrians up to $35 for viewing their electronic devices while crossing streets in the city and surrounding county. Credit Marco Garcia for The New York Times Our most-debated question this week came via our Picture Prompt “ Texting While Walking .” Readers had strong opinions about whether looking at your phone while crossing the street should be illegal. Jackson Spiers from Wilmington, N.C. cited statistics from the article and his own personal experiences to support the law: Looking at your phone while crossing the street should absolutely be illegal. Pedestrian deaths went up 9% in 2016, making the total number of pedestrian deaths in the United States 5,987 people, the highest since 1990. The Governors Highway Safety Association say the reason for this spike in pedestrian deaths can be attributed to the rise in smartphone use in America. Pedestrians distracted by a smartphone can take 18% longer to cross the road than an undistracted pedestrian, this little bit of extra time can be the difference between life and death in some cases. I have some personal experience with distracted pedestrians myself. To get to school in morning I have to cross a busy intersection directly in front of my school. Many other kids like myself also take this route and almost everyday I see students distracted by their cell phones walking very slowly and carelessly across the busy road, almost causing an accident or being hit numerous times. Seeing this very real problem so close opens my eyes to just how dangerous a distracted pedestrian can be. Dalton Laney from Locust Grove high school also thought this law could save lives: I think that texting and walking is just as dangerous as texting and driving. I believe that because when you are texting and walking you are not paying attention to where you are going. You could be texting and walking and walk into the road and make a car swerve to miss you and they could hit someone else or hurt themselves. I think that it should be illegal to text and walk because many people are getting hurt because of it. Tyler Rouse from Wilmington, N.C. was conflicted: Honestly, I’m not really sure how I feel about this article. Banning cellphone use while walking could be a huge help and prevent many pedestrian deaths in the United States and around the world... This could also cause a huge backlash. There are so many smartphone users nowadays and even more kids that use devices all the time. Many teenagers and young adults would probably protest against this type of law for a while. Me, being a teenager, wouldn’t really like to see this become a law but at the same time, it could save my life one day. I think Honolulu is on the right track by enforcing a small fine if people are caught looking at their phone while crossing the street. It teaches them a lesson but doesn’t put them in jail, nor break the bank. Others thought a law against texting while walking was unnecessary and would do little to prevent pedestrian deaths. Judy HHHS from Michigan’s comment summed up nicely what many readers were saying: From a young age, we are taught to look both ways before crossing the street. As we get older, it is easy to to start believing that we are invincible. We forget things like this, unwritten rules that have been formed in order to keep everyone safe. I believe that cellphones should not be used when crossing the street, but I don’t believe that it should be illegal. Creating a law that bans looking at your cellphone while crossing the street would be difficult to enforce, and in this day and age it would be broken all the time. Leah Schwagerl from Wilmington, N.C. thought people needed to take responsibility for their own safety: Texting while walking across the street should not have to come down to a matter of legality. Texting while walking across the street should be a decision based off of common sense, folks! Let’s be real, we all know that when we’re focused on our phones everything around us is a blur. More often than not our phones take our undivided attention, which can become an especially scary and even deadly situation when combined with the known fact that many drivers are looking at their phones as well. In today’s society we just don’t know when to put the phones down...I am curious to see how other cities around the world will address this issue in the following years, but my hope is that common sense will kick in before kicking the bucket due to distracted walking will. Instead of making it illegal, several students proposed other solutions. Brandon HHHS from Michigan suggested an app: I think that walking across the street while texting can be dangerous but i don’t think that there should be a law that stops people from doing it it is their own choice to walk across the road and text. I also think that there are many ways to stop people from doing it we can make apps or at the crossing of every street we can put some kind of device that stops people from texting and crossing the street. Trent A Jones from King of Prussia, Penn. recommended a “no texting while crossing” campaign: Crossing the street especially in a busy city is very dangerous but I wouldn’t rule It Illegal...I think it should be pushed forward and openly approached a lot by different companies and government to uplift a campaign like no texting while crossing or something else so we can at least reduce the numbers of deaths or injuries. Landon HHHS thought the crosswalk sign could give a signal to pedestrians: Is looking at a text more important, or is your life? The text can wait until you are stopped, the cars most likely won’t. The government probably can’t do much about fixing this other than having police fine the people. An app needs to be created that while you’re walking your phone won’t let you access it. Perhaps at crosswalks when it says you can walk to have a friendly reminder to put your phone down And Mitchell Boehling from Wilmington, N.C. advocated adults setting positive examples for children: When David Canepa said “As children, we are taught to look both ways when crossing a street, but you can’t look both ways when you’re looking down and texting.” I feel that this message is more pointed towards parents and their children. Because if a parent tells their child to look both ways before crossing the road then right after saying that the parent just blatantly walks across the crosswalk while their eyes are glued to their phone... _________ Image Credit Amy Lombard for The New York Times Many of you had great ideas for  Halloween costumes for yourselves and your pets this year. Emma Claire Lisk from Wilmington, N.C. wrote a delightful response about her dog’s costume-refusal: Lulu, my five-pound, cute-as-a-button Yorkie will not wear a bow for more than 60 seconds much less inconvenience herself with a diorama strapped to her back all day whether it’s for the prestigious Tompkins Square Halloween Dog Parade or not. What a shame too since Lulu could be so many things for an East Village parade that would surely land her on NYT’s top picks given Lulu’s teacup size and abnormal level of cuteness. Hats off to the owners of Harley, Giupetto, Gianna, and Penelope. Lulu does not sit inside NYC sightseeing buses or saltwater aquariums. Lulu would be the one laying on the street on her back getting tummy rubs from complete strangers. Halloween 2014 Lulu did suffer through going as Piglet with me when I was Winnie the Pooh but that was only because the one sweater on earth she will wear just so happened to be identical to Piglet’s. Will she or I dress up this year? Me, yes, but for Lulu, it will depend on if the costume is non-itchy, does not require her to put anything on her head or hinder her in any way from relaxing on the couch. The best pet costume I’ve ever seen was a Yorkie dressed up as Chewbacca. Its hair was slicked back like Chewy’s and everything. I dream of the day Lulu will let me do that to her. A close second would have to be the “Woof on Wall Street”. That’s pretty clever, Finn. Sharice Brown from Locust Grove High School thought she was too old to dress up this year: This Halloween, I will not be dressing up in any costume because my dressing up days are over. I feel like i’m too old to be dressing up and going trick or treating. People tend to look at older kids that are dressed up as weird and many people believe our generation is all about pranks and parties. So if we come to their door they might automatically assume we are up to no good or ask us “why are you guys not at a party or something?” If I had a group of friends that wanted to dress up in masks and go out to a party, that’ll probably be my excuse as to dress up but not this year. Although, I would like to hand out candy to see all the little children dressed in cute costumes and see if i ever dressed as the when I was younger. I also like giving back to the community. And Anika V from Pennsylvania was dressing up with her dog: I am going to dress up as my favorite football player. His name is Antonio Brown and he is on the Pittsburgh Steelers. They are my favorite team. My dog is going to dress up as a hot dog. It’s a cute costume. The craziest costume is when someone dressed up as Captain Jack Sparrow. He looked exactly like him and I thought it was actually Johnny Depp. We hope you all had a fun Halloween, whatever you did! _________ Image Credit Getty Images Students suggested creative tips for remembering things in response to our writing prompt, “ How Do You Remember What You Need to Remember?" Many said that writing things down, or repeating them aloud, were the best techniques. Jennafer HHHS from Hanover spoke for many when she said: I have a pretty good memory. Whenever I have an important event or important date coming up I usually write them down so that I will remember them. For school I have a planner and I write down when my assignments are due and when there are tests and quizzes. This helps me stay organized and not to forget the little things, that are easily forgotten. Javonna Warren from Locust Grove created stories that prompted her memory: I usually remember what I need to know by making stories up in my mind about the topic. In my healthcare class, each semester we learn 350 medical terms. for our mid-term, they are combined to make actual diseases and you have to determine what it means. I make stories with each word and when I see it, it automatically pops up what story I made for the word. Trey from Georgia offered up three tips: Three Easy Ways to Remember. Tip number one write a to-do list of thing you have to get done like grocery shopping items, because we all should agree there are times were we forget what we need to get from grocery stores. Tip number two, put sticky notes on objects around the house on the object you need to take care of soon like the trash or feeding your animal, or even putting it on the front door to see what your supposed to get while you’re out. Tip number three is fun and easy, play games on your phone or any electronic to help strengthen your mind to help remember, and help the thinking part of it too. So these three tips are simple and easy ways to remember what you could forget. Brandon HHHS from mi said multitasking destroys memory retention: The things that made the most sense to me is when they said that you are missing things when you do more than one thing at a time. I remember things that i need to by writing them down on my phone or a piece of paper. If you want to remember things you have to pay attention to that one thing you can’t do mutiple thing at one time because you are bound to forget something or mix it up with something else. Grayson HHHS from Michigan said there’s an app for that: When I was in a theater class, I would repeat my lines over and over and that made me able to remember what I was supposed to say. There are times when I am able to remember a memory from when I was really young that were traumatic to me. I also remember things by using my phone and other electronic resources. The ‘Reminders’ app, that comes on the iPhone, has helped me a lot and has made me much more responsible. If I were to give someone advice on how to improve their memory, I would recommend repetition and either using a planner, calendar, or a reminder app on a phone. And Bella Cankurtaran from Wilmington, N.C. worries about our ability to remember disappearing completely: Unfortunately, I admit that I solely rely on my phone whenever I have an important task that needs to be completed. I remember when I was in elementary school in the “blackberry age”, and I would write my homework in my agenda. Today, an agenda is a rare sight. I already have a spaced mind as it is and leave so many of my duties undone. It’s causing me to be more reliable on my technology to remind me, instead of using my own brain power. The article mentioned that we have no need to retain information as we can go right to Google for all the answers, and that greatly worries me. If we continue to depend on the internet to feed us information or tell us what we have to accomplish, will we eventually get to a point where we just stop remembering things? _________ Image A chimpanzee in Gombe National Park in Tanzania. Researchers have found that wild and captive chimps share personality traits much like those observed in humans. Credit Alexander Weiss Answers to the question “ What Animal Are You Most Like? ” ranged from an albino cockroach to an anaconda, an owl to a gazelle. Nearly every writer agreed that chimpanzees had human qualities. Soco FSI from Asheville, N.C. said: I am most like a Coyote, they are cunning, not to pretty and jokesters. They know how to use their resources well. I am very resourceful, leave me out in the wilderness for a week with a knife and a bow and arrow, I will survive. I don’t consider my self really pretty, I am average have fat pockets and really don’t care about what I look like. Coyotes can be good jokesters and so can I. Once I start joking I am on a roll. My parents even gave me the nick name Sokopelli. Sokopelli is a mix of my first name Socorro and Kokopelli a trickster god in indigenous culture. Brock Pemberton from Unknown is most like a pigeon: I think I am most like a pigeon, because they possess an ability, according to studies, to learn abstract mathematical rules, and are known to make intelligent choices. Plus, they are an animal that is not difficult to find and seems to fit in with its surrounding environment: the city. _________ Image The professional snowboarder Brett Tippie sandboarding on Great Sand Dunes National Park. Credit Simon Russell/Getty Images Readers told us about their own favorite recreational sports and all the reasons they love them in response to our Picture Prompt about sandboarding . Sports, they told us, have myriad advantages: they keep you in shape, improve your mood, clear your mind, introduce you to new people, develop your character, build skills and let you have fun. Some readers, like Catherine Merritt from Pennsylvania , loved the competition: My favorite recreational activity is lacrosse. I prefer a recreational activity where I get to go outside and play against others. I love to play lacrosse because it’s taught me a lot as an athlete and as a person. It’s also super competitive which makes it super fun, especially when we win. I’ve also gained a lot of opportunities and met a lot of new people that I wouldn’t have ever met if it wasn’t for lacrosse. Overall, lacrosse is part of who I am. Others, like Jalen Owen from Pennsylvania , appreciated how sports gave him a way to stay healthy and build lasting relationships: Being on the cross country team shows how a team can be your family. Your speed nor your time matters to others. Its a fantastic sport to do with your friends, to make new friends, and to go through an experience different from no other sport. In cross country, we all root for each other. In addition, it is a great way to stay in shape, or get in shape, and helps you achieve your goals of becoming a runner, or becoming a better one. Crew is a school sport in which teams compete in boat rowing against one another. This is also a fantastic sport in which your team becomes your family. During practices, we build upper body strength, core strength, and cardio. From how it sounds, you will be able to tell that the workouts are not easy. Through the conditioning, big and small, you push one another, similar to cross country. In between the sweat and exhaustion, you have fun encouraging each other to finish strong and in doing your best. This is why I favor these sports. Cross country and crew are team sports that absolutely recommend. If your school or area offers these sports, take advantage and join! Trent A Jones from King of Prussia, Penn. liked that sports gave him something fun to do and an opportunity to meet new people: Recreational activities are a very fun way to kill free time and meet new people and build relationships. Personally in the spring and fall I play baseball and i get to meet a lot of different people from different teams and new people on the new team i joined this spring and fall. During the winter I like to go to different mountain and snowboard everyplace I can that is local and I meet a lot more people in the winter than over the spring and fall. Sandboarding is something different and I don’t see it a lot but if I ever have the chance to do it I absolutely will try it and I might nail it and do really good fast because I have been snowboarding and skiing since I was 4 years old. And Luka from FSI Asheville, N.C. has learned athletic and life skills from golf: My favorite recreational activity is golf. Golf is much more than a game, and it can help you with life skills later on. You can get outside on a beautiful golf course that is out in nature, quiet and non-contact. Golf is also a great sport as it builds trust and honesty while playing others. Sometimes when life gets hectic its always great to get out on the golf course or the driving range and hit a few golf balls, as it is relaxing, and fun at the same time. Golfers are also very mature, and proper, and the clothing is very high end. This reflects golfing values. _________ Image Credit Adam Higton We loved the thoughtful, diverse, and often profound comments that came in for “ Do You Spend Enough Time With Other People? ” Emilia Cordon from Wilmington, N.C . can pinpoint when she is lacking for social interaction: I personally believe I have a good balance between social and private time. I can usually notice when I start lacking in social time because I talk too much in ballet class. I am an introvert, which often surprises many, but just like the connection between my social life and misbehavior, if I don’t get enough alone time I get very irritable and sort of depressed. This is a challenge for me, and I struggle in finding an appropriate balance of social and private interactions. My mother is a user of one of those meditation apps mentioned in the article. She insists that all “energy” from within, whether it’s positive or negative, will reflect back to you, and all things start from within. I have often disagreed with her. I believe happiness can be achieved existentially, maybe not with material things or phones, but personal connections between friends and family. I am not an avid phone or social media user. I simply prefer in person conversations to texting. I’m sure there is a connection with smartphones and social interactions, but it doesn’t only affect teens. As I said with my mom, she actively uses this meditation app and honestly uses social media more than I do. This social problem affects all people who have a phone and replace healthy social reactions with the unhealthy socializing provided by social media. Because it is right at your fingertips, the value of true conversations has diminished and is ruining society. Jonathan Grinde from Minnesota said college is lonelier than high school: As a college student, the way I spend my time has vastly changed since I was in high school. In high school, I played five different sports and was a member of Model UN and other clubs. I had close friends with whom I would talk to in class and meet after school or practice. I would go to the library and do homework with friends. But now, I find myself alone much more. I eat breakfasts and other meals alone. My homework tends to need more individual focus which demands quiet and solitude so doing homework alone has become the norm. It is harder than I thought it would be to grow and keep relationships when time moves so quickly and a week can involve so many inconsistencies. I try and recognize the benefits of being able to do what I want, when I want but it does become lonely. The appropriate balance is hard to find but I look for ways to be around people more and more. Lavaris Cheeks from Locust Grove, Ga. said simply: I like being by my self Karson, also from Locust Grove, is happiest with friends: The time spent with friends older or younger, you will always remember those times. That time holds a special place in your heart, and when you are with your friends you don’t worry about the struggles of life, you are just enjoying it. Spending time with other people is enough, its more than enough. The people you surround yourself with describes you and how you are, if that was taken away from you, your whole life would be changed. I think that everyone should spend more time socializing, not just in school but also outside of it. Socializing creates bonds with people that will have a place in your heart no matter what, because you spend so much time with them they become like family. And Desire from Locust Grove sees together-time devalued: I feel that many teenagers don’t physically interact with other people. Usually, when I’m out, and I do see other teenagers together, they are sitting at a table on their phones not even talking to one another. I also think that things like video chat have replaced talking to friends in person. I think that social relationships are important in the development of people and their happiness. I feel that as technology develops and evolves, people begin to interact less and less than each other. People, especially teenagers, no longer value actual human interaction. Grant Holland from Wilmington N.C. was upbeat: Throughout my life, I have always been taught to keep a balance of things. Either between school, hobbies, or church. Though, I have never thought about balancing my social life. Now thinking about it, yes, I have been able to balance my social life between being alone and socializing with others.I am able to socialize with others through school, church and at home. I like communicating with others. I try to talk and hang out with people most of the time, but I feel like there are a few factors that hold me back. Schoolwork is my main factor that affects my social life; I spend the majority of time working on assigned homework. If the amount of assigned homework decreased by half, my amount of socializing would increase tremendously. ...Now since we live in a world full of advanced technology, our mind sets have changed from face to face talk to face to phone entertainment. Personally, I am not the kind of person that is “married” to my phone. Socializing improves mental health. Try it, it works! And Xander Kruvczuk of United States of America ended with a line we loved: I feel like the amount of time I spend with my friends is very little if not at all. Whenever I get to see them in person it is always at school and we never have much time to socialize. I feel like myself and others should spend actual face to face time with each other. This will help us get off of our electronics and experience the real world. No good memory has ever come from two people texting one another over instant message. _________ Image Readers spooked us with their scary Halloween stories . Here are a few of our favorites. Grace S from Germantown, M.D. used suspense to keep us reading: There’s a house that’s unlike any other house in the neighborhood. It’s a tall, spiraling cylinder of a house. Inside lives an old couple. Every morning they sit on their porch, enjoying a nice cup of coffee and the newspaper. Every morning their neighbor greets them and they have a nice little chat. But one morning, the couple wasn’t out on their porch. The neighbor noticed, but thought that it might have just been something for that one day. But it wasn’t. For the next week, the couple wasn’t one their front porch. Finally, the neighbor knocked on their front door to see what was going on. No answer. The neighbor decided to call the police. Two policemen arrived. They searched the entire house but couldn’t find anything. One policeman thought that the bathroom was suspicious, so he stayed behind. The other policeman went down to the neighbor to talk. Suddenly, there was a loud scream from inside the house. The policeman ran up into the bathroom, and when he got there, found a bloody handprint on the shower curtain. Annie from Upper Merion High School KoP had us on the edge of our seats: The scariest story i’ve ever heard was told to me at a beautiful place called Camp Waziyatah, It was my third year there and that year I had stayed 6 weeks. First session through half of second session. The story was called the Emily story, it was about this girl named emily and back when the camp used to be an all girls camp they would have dances with the all boys camp across the lake. She met this boy and really liked him, he really liked her. The guy and her decided that they would meet in the middle of the lake, he would bring a boat. She would swim, When it came the time to meet which was 12pm. She got up, put her bathing suit on and put red lipstick on and kissed the corner of the mirror and headed off. She swam to the middle and treaded water for about an hour, she got scared he didn’t arrive so she decided to turn around. By that time fog and settled in while she was swimming and little did she know she was swimming the length of the lake, which was a 3 mile swim and she was a tiny girl. She soon got tired and drowned, in the morning they looked for her and eventually found her body drifting in the lake. Later in the day they also found out the boy had been caught by his friends and not allowed to go. They say that every night when the clock hits 12, if you look in the mirror that Emily had kissed a kiss mark will appear in the corner and the reflection staring back at you...Wouldn’t be yours. Midori P.O from Georgia related an old legend: The scariest story I’ve ever heard is the myth of the filipino Tik-Tik,or Manananggal. These creatures take the form of a beautiful woman with bat wings.They’re lower body roots to the ground while the torso flies away in search of human blood. To keep them away you have to put salt or garlic in your window;they are like the western vampire in that sense. The only way to kill it is to find the lower body and sprinkle either salt or ashes on the open area.That keeps it from reattaching to to the upper body.What makes them especially scary is that they are tricksters.They confuse they’re prey with the sound that they make.The farther away they sound,the closer they are to you. Annie C from Ann Arbor, Mich. added a little humor: A group of college students was hanging out in Susy’s one night when the phone rang. “Hello?” Susy asked. “This is the viper. Be ready” She hung up and went back to her friends. A half-hour later, the phone rang again. “He- Hello?” She asked “It’s the viper. I’m five minutes away” She hung up. She didn’t know what to do. She rushed her friends out and locked the door. The phone rang once more. “I’m walking down the hall now-” The phone hung up. She stood by the door looking through the peephole. She heard footsteps and hid behind the couch. “Open up!” a man called out “I am the viper and I am here to vipe your vindows!” Even more frightening were some of the real-life encounters with the supernatural readers shared. Valarie B from Georgia believes in spirits after these eerie experiences: I believe in ghost because I have experienced a few things. My parents tell me this story all the time, when I was younger (just turned 2) my dad was giving me a bath before bed and he said that I pointed behind him (there was nothing behind him but a closed door) and kept saying different body parts, my dad thinks that I was seeing different parts of something, my dad though it was extra creepy because I was barely talking yet. Another encounter I’ve had was when my dad’s friend had just passed away and one night I was laying in the bed with my best friend and the end of the bed starting going down in one area and made a creaking noise, me and my friend said the only explanation was that someone was sitting down at the end of the bed. Juanita Puentes from LGHS lived her own ghost story: I’m not quite sure what the scariest story that I’ve heard is because I’ve heard a lot of them, I do believe that ghost exists lived in a lot of haunted houses in the past and I’ve heard and seen some terrifying stuff. when I was about 7 years old I lived in a very old house that hadn’t been lived in for years, there were 3 rooms and my sister and I shared one. the room only had three walls though where the fourth wall should have been was the staircase to come upstairs, one night and my sister and laid in bed for some reason I just couldn’t go to sleep the night seemed so long. I looked around the room out of boredom as I looked something caught my eye by the stairs I focused my eyes really hard to try to see what it was,I swear when I saw this shadow crawling up the stairs I felt my heart drop I hid under the blanket hoping that when I came out it would be gone, I was so terrified I couldn’t believe it. I nudged my sister to wake her up but, she was already awake, she asked me if I had just seen that black thing crawling up the stairs. As we uncovered our faces to see if it was gone we both saw the black shadow sitting at the desk we had in the corner of the room. Honestly, that was so scary for me and probably for my sister too, you may not believe it but it was a true story. Rose M from the United States’ “supernatural encounter” had a twist ending: One day, when my brother and I were home alone after school, so we decided to play some video games and eat snacks instead of our homework. Our mom wasn’t coming home for at least two hours. Caught up in our Mario Kart game, we couldn’t happen but to hear loud banging on our garage door, the room just off where we were. It sounded like an angry serial killer was banging to see if anyone was home. We knew we closed the garage doors, so how did he get in? The door to the house was locked too. I started to quietly cry, and my brother panicking, told me to get the two biggest knifes out of the kitchen drawers. Agreeing, I did as I was told, and my brother dialed my mom. She picked up and told us to call the police if we hear anything else and to go up into a locked room upstairs. We scurried upstairs and stayed there until mom got home. When she opened the door to the house, she was laughing hysterically. I was so confused, what is so funny about your children potentially dying? She then told us to come back downstairs and to look in the garage. There we found that six or seven soda cans had fallen onto the floor, making a loud bang that we thought was someone trying to break in. That was the scariest thing I have ever experienced. Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              