   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index U.S. Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by California Today California Today: Considering a Single-Payer Insurance System Image Lt. Gov. Gavin Newsom last month in Beverly Hills, Calif. Credit Willy Sanjuan/Invision, via Associated Press By  Jonah Engel Bromwich March 28, 2017 Good morning. (Want to get California Today by email? Here’s the sign-up .) Today’s introduction comes to us from Jennifer Medina, a national correspondent based in Los Angeles . “We’re going to be living with Obamacare for the foreseeable future,” Paul Ryan, the Republican speaker of the House announced minutes after the legislation to repeal the law collapsed in Congress last week. Now some political leaders in California want to go even further. Last month State Senators Ricardo Lara and Toni Atkins introduced legislation to replace private health insurance with a publicly funded health care system run by the state government known as a single-payer system. The bill does not include any details of how the state would pay for the multibillion program, instead simply declaring “it is the intent of the Legislature to enact legislation that would establish a comprehensive universal single-payer health care coverage program and a health care cost control system for the benefit of all residents of the state.” Gov. Jerry Brown, who is both a fiscal hawk and an ardent supporter of Affordable Care Act, has already spoken about his skepticism of a single-payer program, saying it would be prohibitively expensive . But at least one candidate running for governor next year plans to make universal health care a centerpiece of the campaign. Earlier this month Lt. Gov. Gavin Newsom said he was working with health care experts to craft a plan for a single-payer system. While he was mayor, the city approved a plan to offer universal health care for all of its residents. Mr. Lara said the Republican defeat in Congress could pave the way for a single-payer system. “It’s easier to expand health care than make up lost ground as we would have had to do,” he said. “We really have the chance to make universal health care a reality now.” The proposal differs from existing programs in one big way: It would include all residents, regardless of their immigration status. Obamacare explicitly excluded undocumented immigrants from benefits of the program, though children in California can receive basic coverage even if they are undocumented. Advocates of a single-payer program argue that it would bring down costs and encourage preventive care. But opponents say there would be less choice and efficiency in medical care, and that taxes would rise significantly for all residents. This is not the first time state leaders have pressed for a single-payer bill. Similar legislation was passed in 2006 and 2008, though it did not include a way to pay from the system. Gov. Arnold Schwarzenegger vetoed the bill. Do you think California should move to a single-payer system? Email us your thoughts at catoday@nytimes.com . California Online (Please note: We regularly highlight articles on news sites that have limited access for nonsubscribers.) • Representatives Adam B. Schiff and Nancy Pelosi of California suggested that Representative Devin Nunes should recuse himself from an investigation into Russian meddling in the 2016 presidential election. [ The New York Times ] • Mr. Nunes and Mr. Schiff could not be more different. [ Opinion|Los Angeles Times ] • California’s attorney general, Xavier Becerra, has forcefully criticized Mr. Trump. But in office, he has taken a more measured approach. [ The Sacramento Bee ] • Leaders across Southern California said they would continue to protect people who are in the country illegally despite a warning from Attorney General Jeff Sessions. [ Los Angeles Times ] Image Torrey Pines State Beach in San Diego, which is near a fault system that runs continuously through San Diego, Orange and Los Angeles counties. Credit Mike Blake/Reuters • New research shows that fault zones formerly thought to be separate make up one continuous system running through San Diego, Orange and Los Angeles counties, making a bigger earthquake more likely. [ The New York Times ] • The Raiders are leaving Oakland — again. The team’s move to Las Vegas was approved by the N.F.L. [ The New York Times ] • East Bay officials are exploring options to sue the Raiders and possibly the N.F.L. after the decision. [ San Francisco Chronicle ] • The N.F.L. makes two demands of its owners: Build ever-grander stadiums with as many public dollars as you can find; and never, ever feel shame. [ Michael Powell | The New York Times ] Image Raiders fans rallied outside Oakland-Alameda County Coliseum on Saturday in hopes of persuading the franchise to stay. Credit Eric Risberg/Associated Press • A fire on the third floor of a residential building in Oakland killed at least three people and displaced more than 100. [ SFGate ] • Los Angeles County officials are considering imposing tolls on more car pool lanes in an effort to speed up traffic on the region’s freeways. [Los Angeles Times ] • Bill Croyle, the state’s top water manager, said Monday that the Oroville Reservoir will have a new spillway in place to prevent potentially dangerous outflows of water by Nov. 1. [ SFGate ] Image Firefighters battled an apartment fire that killed at least three people in Oakland. Credit Ben Margot/Associated Press • Uber resumed testing its self-driving cars in San Francisco Monday after a crash in Arizona briefly halted the program. [ The Mercury News ] • A Los Angeles man caught a 50-pound carp in MacArthur Park Lake. [ LAist ] And Finally ... Image Credit Alana Ayasse The National Park Service purchased Santa Rosa Island in 1986 from the Vail & Vickers ranch. In 1998, cattle ranching on the island ended for good . But some vestiges of the island’s ranching past still remain. Alana Ayasse, a graduate student studying geography at UC-Santa Barbara, took the above picture on the island in September, while volunteering for a week with Channel Islands Restoration , a nonprofit that helps tend to the health of plants and animals in the park. She came across the horses while walking back to a field station one evening. “You can just see them wandering up there,” Ms. Ayasse said in a phone interview Monday. “They’re supercool.” Ken Owen, the executive director of Channel Islands Restoration, said the horses were kept to a portion of the island where they would not harm any rare plants. “They’re literally a cultural artifact,” he said. “And there’s really no reason to remove them.” Want to submit a photo for possible publication? You can do it here . California Today goes live at 6 a.m. Pacific time weekdays. Tell us what you want to see: CAtoday@nytimes.com . California Today is edited by Julie Bloom, who grew up in Los Angeles and graduated from U.C. Berkeley. Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              