   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Television Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by What’s on Saturday By  Kathryn Shattuck May 10, 2014 8 P.M. (HBO) PRISONERS (2013) Keller Dover (Hugh Jackman), a grief-stricken father in a small Pennsylvania town, contemplates the torture and murder of the man (Paul Dano, above right, with Mr. Jackman) he believes has kidnapped his daughter and her friend in this thriller, directed by Denis Villeneuve. Maria Bello plays Dover’s wife, submerged in despair; Viola Davis and Terrence Howard are the other girl’s parents, whose doubts about Dover’s means of extracting information strike him as weak and irrational; Melissa Leo is the suspect’s aunt, intent on shielding her mentally disabled nephew; and Jake Gyllenhaal is the tormented cop determined to solve the case. “ ‘Prisoners’ is the kind of movie that can quiet a room full of casual thrill-seekers,” A. O. Scott wrote in The New York Times. “It absorbs and controls your attention with such assurance that you hold your breath for fear of distracting the people on screen, exhaling in relief or amazement at each new revelation. By the end you may be a little worn out, and perhaps also slightly let down by the fussily clever revelations that wrap up the story, but in the meantime you are a willing captive, unable to tell the difference between dread and delight.” 10:30 A.M. (13) RELIGION & ETHICS NEWSWEEKLY Former President Jimmy Carter speaks with Bob Faw about the worldwide abuse of women and girls and what he sees as the misreading of Scripture that some use to justify their actions. Kim Lawton visits the site on the Jordan River where St. John is said to have baptized Jesus and where Pope Francis has invited Syrian refugees and disabled young people to join him for a meal this month. 6 P.M. (Starz Cinema) IN A BETTER WORLD (2011) In this Oscar winner for best foreign-language film, a Swedish doctor, Anton (Mikael Persbrandt, above), divides his time between his semi-estranged wife and two sons in Denmark and a refugee camp in Africa, where his patients are victims of a ruthless warlord. At first, Anton confronts the horror stoically. But when his older child (Markus Rygaard) exacts revenge against the bully who torments him at school, and the warlord comes to his clinic seeking treatment, Anton’s calm facade cracks. “The performances are impeccable,” A. O. Scott wrote in The Times of this drama directed by Susanne Bier, “and the images, of verdant Denmark and parched Africa, are lovely without being too ostentatiously gorgeous.” But, he added, “everything about ‘In a Better World’ feels just a little too easy: A better movie might have let in more of the messiness of the world as it is.” 8 P.M. (Hallmark) MOM’S DAY AWAY (2014) While her family ignores her on Mother’s Day, a stay-at-home mom (Bonnie Somerville) is swept away by her glamorous best friend (Ona Grauer) to an opulent resort, where she ponders the life she could have had. 8 P.M. (Lifetime) THE GOOD SISTER (2014) A woman (Sonya Walger) in a troubled marriage discovers she has a long-lost twin. She doesn’t have a good feeling about her newfound sister. But her husband (Ben Bass) can’t resist this sexier version of his wife. 9 P.M. (CUNY) THE SMALLEST SHOW ON EARTH (1957) In this latest installment in the “Classics of British Cinema” series, a struggling writer and his wife (the real-life spouses Bill Travers and Virginia McKenna) inherit a rundown movie theater in a tiny English town along with its in incompetent staff (Peter Sellers, Margaret Rutherford and Bernard Miles). 10 P.M. (CBS) 48 HOURS: A RAGING SON Troy Roberts investigates the 2012 murder of Danielle Thomas, a Weight Watchers executive, by her boyfriend, Jason Bohn, a Wall Street lawyer who said that being neglected by his mother when he was a child caused him to develop a mental illness known as intermittent explosive disorder and should keep him from spending the rest of his life in jail. 10 P.M. (Fox News) FOX NEWS REPORTING: THE NSA’S SECRET WAR — WHO’S THE ENEMY? Bret Baier hosts this special, which ventures inside the National Security Agency headquarters and features interviews with Senator Rand Paul, Republican of Kentucky; Michael V. Hayden and Keith B. Alexander, former directors of the agency; and James Bamford, the author of “The Shadow Factory: The Ultra-Secret NSA From 9/11 to the Eavesdropping on America.” KATHRYN SHATTUCK A version of this article appears in print on , on Page C 9 of the New York edition with the headline: What’s On Saturday . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              