   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index U.S. Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Shirley Hufstedler, Judge and Cabinet’s First Education Secretary, Dies at 90 Image Shirley and Seth Hufstedler at her swearing-in ceremony with President Jimmy Carter and Chief Justice Warren E. Burger. Credit Associated Press By  Sam Roberts March 31, 2016 Shirley Hufstedler, a pathbreaking former federal judge who became the nation’s first cabinet-level secretary of education, nominated by President Jimmy Carter, died on Wednesday in Glendale, Calif. She was 90. Her death was announced by Morrison & Foerster, the Los Angeles law firm where she was senior of counsel. The cause was cerebrovascular disease, her son, Dr. Steve Hufstedler, said. Regarded as a civil libertarian and a feminist sensitive to the concerns of minorities, Judge Hufstedler was only the second woman named to the federal appellate bench and was widely considered the favorite to be the first woman nominated to the Supreme Court if a vacancy arose during the Carter administration. But none did. (That distinction went to Sandra Day O’Connor, who was nominated by Mr. Carter’s successor, Ronald Reagan, and appointed in 1981.) The Senate confirmed Judge Hufstedler’s appointment as education secretary, 81 to 2, on Nov. 30, 1979. She presided over the birth of the education department when it was spun off by Congress from the Department of Health, Education and Welfare and given a $14 billion budget. Judge Hufstedler largely succeeded in her first priority: restoring programs for the disabled and disadvantaged that had been pruned. “That wouldn’t have happened if we were still part of H.E.W.,” Richard Beattie, her former staff director, said at the time. The current education secretary, John B. King Jr., on Thursday called Judge Hufstedler “a trailblazer and a champion for equity, defining the department’s role as a protector of civil rights.” In reaching beyond the education profession to fill the post, Mr. Carter chose a former part-time teacher who had tutored students in English, shorthand and piano. While growing up, she had been shunted among 12 schools as her father moved the family through the mountain states. Judge Hufstedler was as comfortable in the cabinet as in the classroom, or trekking in the Himalayas. (“A den mother gone wild” was how she once described herself.) In a profile in The New York Times Magazine in 1980, Phyllis Theroux wrote that the judge was so well liked that “scratching around the soil for detractors yields no worms.” Shirley Ann Mount was born of pioneer stock in Denver on Aug. 24, 1925. Her mother, the former Eva von Behren, taught in a one-room schoolhouse and then a high school in Colorado. Her father, Earl Stanley Mount, was a peripatetic building contractor whose property holdings were wiped out during the Depression. In Albuquerque, Mr. Mount was hired to build a home for Ernie Pyle , a war correspondent, who befriended young Shirley and made her the inspiration for “the girl next door” in his Americana columns from New Mexico. Pyle, she saidd, “believed in me and my intellectual talents, and knew of my interests in art and literature.” She was only 19 when she graduated from the University of New Mexico in 1945 with a degree in business administration. She considered a diplomatic career but ultimately rejected one because she believed that the Foreign Service drove women into dead-end jobs. She considered becoming a doctor but could not afford medical school. Instead, she headed for Los Angeles intending to pursue a job with an advertising agency, until she ran into the actor Burgess Meredith, to whom she had earlier been introduced by Pyle. At the time, Meredith was playing Pyle in the 1945 film “The Story of G.I. Joe.” Soon Shirley Mount was working as a secretary for Meredith and his wife, the actress Paulette Goddard. She eventually gravitated to the law after “seeing that the people doing well were not the movie group but their attorneys,” her brother, Kenneth, once told The Associated Press. She became one of the first women to graduate from Stanford Law School, finishing 10th in her class, which included one other woman. She was in private practice for a decade. She married a law school classmate, Seth Hufstedler, who survives her and continues to practice as senior of counsel with Morrison Foerster. Besides him and her son, she is survived by three grandchildren. Judge Hufstedler was appointed to the Los Angeles County Superior Court in 1961 and elected to the bench the next year. In 1966, she was named an associate justice of the California Court of Appeal by Gov. Edmund G. Brown. Two years later, President Lyndon B. Johnson appointed her to the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit. She served for 11 years before relinquishing lifetime tenure as a federal judge when she was nominated as education secretary. “I reached the White House expecting to be interviewed as one of several possibilities on a short list, only to discover I was the list,” she said in 1981. “I felt like a girl who had been invited to meet her fiancé’s family only to find herself walking down the aisle.” Returning to California in 1981 to teach and practice law after Mr. Carter was denied re-election, she became a partner in Hufstedler & Kaus (now Morrison & Foerster) in Los Angeles. That year, she reflected on her 13 months in Washington in an open letter to her successor , Terrel H. Bell, in the Times magazine, advising him to “ensure equal educational opportunity for disadvantaged youngsters.” “I am sure you will find, as I have, that a great many people are willing to fight over children, but precious few are willing to fight for them,” she wrote. “Your job, shorn of the paper and the bureaucracy, is to fight forcefully and joyfully for those kids.” A version of this article appears in print on , on Page B 15 of the New York edition with the headline: Shirley Hufstedler, 90, Pioneering Judge and First Cabinet Education Secretary . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              