   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Movies Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Movie Listings for Nov. 27-Dec. 3 Nov. 26, 2015 Ratings and running times are in parentheses; foreign films have English subtitles. Full reviews of all current releases: nytimes.com/movies. ★ ‘Amy’ (R, 2:08) Asif Kapadia’s shattering biographical portrait of the British singer and songwriter Amy Winehouse traces the arc of her short, messy life from smoky-voiced jazz singer to global pop sensation to her death in 2011, at 27, from alcohol poisoning. This material makes for uneasy viewing, as do some of her agonizing self-portraits, though there’s a great deal more to this documentary than sad spectacle. (Manohla Dargis) ‘The Assassin’ (No rating, 1:44) Ravishing to behold but stilted in its emotions and mannered in its techniques, this sword-and-vengeance mini-epic, directed by Hou Hsiao-Hsien, stars Shu Qi as a woman dispatched by the imperial authorities to kill a rebellious provincial potentate, who happens to be her cousin. (A.O. Scott) ★ ‘Bridge of Spies’ (PG-13, 2:15) In this gravely moody, perfectly directed thriller about a real 1962 spy swap, Steven Spielberg returns you to the good old bad days of the Cold War and its fictions, with their bottomless political chasms and moral gray areas. Tom Hanks leads a terrific cast that includes Mark Rylance as a Soviet mole and Scott Shepherd as a C.I.A. operative. (Dargis) ★ ‘Brooklyn’ (PG-13, 1:51) Saoirse Ronan gives a remarkably lively and subtle performance as Eilis Lacey, a young woman who emigrates from Ireland to New York in the early 1950s, in John Crowley’s lovely adaptation of the novel by Colm Toibin. (Scott) ‘Burnt’ (R, 1:40) Bradley Cooper plays a once-hot chef who is trying to regain his stature. If reality TV hasn’t provided you with enough tyrannical chefs and images of artfully arranged food, this movie’s for you. (Neil Genzlinger) ‘By the Sea’ (R, 2:02) This marital melodrama stars the writer-director Angelina Jolie Pitt and her husband (some guy named Brad) as an unhappy couple working through the tears in 1970s South of France. The result is a knowing or at least a ticklishly amusing demonstration of celebrity and its relay of gazes from one of the most looked-at women in the world. (Dargis) ★ ‘Carol’ (R, 1:58) Todd Haynes’s gorgeous adaptation of a Patricia Highsmith novel stars Rooney Mara as Therese Belivet, a young woman in early-1950s New York who falls for an older suburban housewife played by Cate Blanchett. The blossoming of their love affair is related in subdued colors and whispered words, and it lingers in the air like an old song. (Scott) ‘Censored Voices’ (No rating, 1:24, in Hebrew and English) Days after the Six-Day War in 1967, the conflict that reshaped a victorious Israel, returning soldiers discussed why they did not share the nation’s euphoria. Amos Oz and Avraham Shapira revisit those talks, most of which were originally censored by Israeli military; the longer the discussions, the darker the stories. An essential amendment to the historical record, Mor Loushy’s film reminds us that no war is entirely virtuous and makes clear that the dangers of occupation were evident even then. (Daniel M. Gold) ★ ‘Creed’ (PG-13, 2:13) The “Rocky” saga, revised and reborn, with the Italian Stallion in the role of the grizzled trainer, helping a young contender prepare for his shot at the title. The contender is Adonis Johnson (Michael B. Jordan), the love child of Apollo Creed, Rocky’s erstwhile nemesis and eventual best friend. The director is Ryan Coogler (“Fruitvale Station”), at 29 a rising champion in his own right. (Scott) ‘Crimson Peak’ (R, 1:59) From Guillermo del Toro, modern cinema’s No. 1 genre geek, comes a lush and macabre gothic romance, with a few ghosts thrown in for extra scares. Mia Wasikowska plays Edith, an early-20th century heiress from Buffalo who marries a British aristocrat (Tom Hiddleston) and moves to the spooky mansion he shares with his sister (Jessica Chastain). The mood of sinister, brooding eroticism is broken by Mr. del Toro’s compulsive exuberance. He throws in too many special effects and technical tricks, when all he really needs is Ms. Chastain’s chin. (Scott) ‘Democrats’ (No rating, 1:39) Camilla Nielsson’s outstanding documentary goes inside the negotiations meant to produce Zimbabwe’s first democratic constitution, through the eyes of opposing party heads, one an idealist, the other a pragmatist. Or is it the other way around? The movie is both upsetting and at least a little bit inspiring. (Glenn Kenny) ‘Drone’ (No rating, 1:19, in English, Urdu and Pashtu) Some of the practical concerns and moral issues covered in this documentary about the rapidly increasing use of drone airstrikes are already familiar from other coverage, but others are relatively unexplored. In any case, any effort that makes us pause and think more deeply about the implications of this type of warfare rather than just accept the governments assurances is worth watching. (Neil Genzlinger) ★ ‘Goodnight Mommy’ (R, 1:40) Unspooling with virtually no music and a seriously unsettling sound design, this richly photographed and carefully controlled creep-out (from the Austrian directors Veronika Franz and Severin Fiala) centers on the escalating cruelty of twin boys who come to believe that their mother is an impostor. (Jeannette Catsoulis) ‘Goosebumps’ (PG, 1:43) R.L. Stine’s best-selling series spawns a jam-packed CGI-heavy adaptation that’s more like a toy chest than a movie. Jack Black plays the author, imagined here as a curmudgeon whose books actually harbor spooky characters that are released into the real world by a couple of teenagers. Colorful squeal-inducing havoc follows, but most real feeling is roped off in stilted scenes. (Rapold) '#Horror’ (No rating, 1:30) A group of privileged and obnoxious preteen girls is stalked by an anonymous cyberbully in Tara Subkoff’s soulless directing debut, a frosty social commentary whose scariest threat emerges not from its empty landscapes and sleek interiors, but from a seductive online world of likes and followers. (Catsoulis) ‘He Named Me Malala’ (PG-13, 1:27) Malala Yousafzai, the Pakistani teenager who was shot by the Taliban in 2012 but has continued to campaign for education for girls, is a familiar face now in the West, especially since winning the Nobel Peace Prize. This documentary about her by Davis Guggenheim, which feels as if it is made for a school-age audience, is content to propagate her message, only intermittently finding the unguarded moments beneath the media image. (Genzlinger) ★ ‘Heart of a Dog’ (No rating, 1:15) This dreamy, drifty and altogether lovely autobiographical movie from the artist and musician Laurie Anderson is about telling and remembering and forgetting, and how we put together the fragments that make up our lives – their flotsam and jetsam, highs and lows, meaningful and slight details, shrieking and weeping headline news. (Dargis) ‘Hotel Transylvania 2’ (PG, 1:29) Adam Sandler returns as the voice of Dracula, whose daughter and her human husband (voiced by Selena Gomez and Andy Samberg) have produced a son. While Drac yearns for him to show a vampirish side, the in-laws do not. Conflicts over parenting styles and bits about out-of-touch oldsters ensue. As it turns out, gags about texting-challenged seniors are no less tedious when applied to the undead. Still, the whole thing is amiable and colorful. It may not kill you to take your kids. (Kenny) ‘The House That Jack Built’ (No rating, 1:27) This New York City kitchen sink drama, written by the Bronx-born filmmaker Joseph Vasquez (“Hangin’ With the Homeboys”), who died in 1995, overflows with pungent street flavor. But the film, about the domestic and street ordeals of a drug dealer, also teems with one too many contrived, overheated situations. (Andy Webster) ★ ‘The Hunger Games: Mockingjay Part 2’ (PG-13, 2:16) Katniss Everdeen (Jennifer Lawrence) returns to finish the fight, defeat the enemy and send off a big-screen series that has had an astonishing run both in cold-cash terms and in its meaningful symbolism. She’s ready (and so are you). (Dargis) ★ ‘In Jackson Heights’ (No rating, 3:10) This thrilling, transporting love letter from Frederick Wiseman to New York and its multi-everything glory takes place in the Queens neighborhood of its title — where people from across the globe converge. Under Mr. Wiseman’s steady gaze, his documentary becomes a deeply stirring ode to the immigrant experience and American identity. (Dargis) ‘Ingrid Bergman: In Her Own Words’ (No rating, 1:54, in Swedish, English, Italian and French) Cinephile catnip, Stig Bjorkman’s entertaining, generally celebratory documentary about Ingrid Bergman revisits the many lives of this starlet turned star, turned exile, turned legend — primarily through her own words and pictures, embellishing them with written and on-camera reminiscences from both intimates and acquaintances. (Dargis) ‘The Intern’ (PG-13, 2:01) In Nancy Meyer’s latest lifestyle fantasy, Robert De Niro plays a gentler, kinder father figure who comes equipped with a laundered handkerchief and the wisdom of the elders for his new boss (Anne Hathaway), an entrepreneur with issues. (Dargis) ‘James White’ (R, 1:25) Cynthia Nixon gives an awards-worthy performance as a dying cancer patient whose grown-up son — a floundering, self-destructive slacker in New York — struggles to come to terms with her imminent demise. This small gem captures the din and chaos of the city with a hard-edged ferocity that sinks under your skin. (Stephen Holden) ‘The Last Witch Hunter’ (PG-13, 1:38) This Vin Diesel supernatural action vehicle, for all its frantic, overstuffed visuals, is a smorgasbord of empty calories. (Webster) ‘Love’ (No rating, 2:14) Telling the story of a romance entirely through explicit sex, the Argentine director Gaspar Noé creates a visual tranquillity and dreamy eroticism that strips the film of salaciousness and highlights the only conversation it cares about: The one that runs from between the legs to between the ears. (Catsoulis) ‘Love the Coopers’ (PG-13, 1:47) You can’t manufacture a Christmas classic by cobbling together scenes and themes from previous Christmas classics, but this dud tries. It’s the usual story of a dysfunctional family that gathers for a holiday meal, and it’s full of recognizable names — Diane Keaton, John Goodman, Marisa Tomei, Olivia Wilde — but it almost never feels genuine. (Genzlinger) ★ ‘The Martian’ (PG-13, 2:21) Matt Damon stars in Ridley Scott’s space western and blissed-out cosmic high about an American astronaut who, like a latter-day Robinson Crusoe, learns to survive on his own island of despair. Funny, loose and optimistic. (Dargis) ‘Maze Runner: The Scorch Trials’ (PG-13, 2:11) The second in a series about a racially diverse but otherwise interchangeable set of teenagers adds nothing new to the unkillable dystopian genre, but it’s at least less ponderous than its predecessor. The many chases and ludicrous narrow escapes offer respectable doses of adrenaline. (John Williams) ★ ‘Mediterranea’ (No rating, 1:51 in French, Italian, English, Arabic and Bissa) Based on true events, and written and directed in a semi-neorealist style by Jonas Carpignano, “Mediterranea” is one of the earliest films in what is almost certain to be a deluge of movies about 21st-century migrants risking everything to seek a better life in Europe. It follows the harrowing odyssey of two close friends from Burkina Faso who cross the Mediterranean to settle in Italy where they encounter hostility and violence. (Holden) ‘Meet the Patels’ (PG, 1:28) This tidy, easygoing documentary — about the efforts of Indian-born parents to marry off their prosperous son (the actor Ravi Patel) through assorted matchmaking means — is a fascinating, good-humored and sometimes dramatic examination of family dynamics. Though Mr. Patel is on camera most often (shot by his wry, understated foil, sister and co-director, Geeta), it’s his parents and the barely seen Geeta who prove most compelling. (Webster) ★ ‘Mustang’ (PG-13, 1:37, in Turkish) Full of life, “Mustang” is a stunning debut feature by Deniz Gamze Ergüven about five sisters in rural Turkey. Confined to their grandmother’s house, the girls bridle against losing their freedoms in a story grounded in both laughter and tears, and in the resilient strength of these girls against soul-deadening strictures. (Rapold) ‘The Night Before’ (R, 1:41) A harmlessly naughty Christmas-themed bro comedy, with Seth Rogen, Anthony Mackie and Joseph Gordon-Levitt as the bros. Comic relief is provided by the guest stars, among them Ilana Glazer, Mindy Kaling and — spoiler alert! — Mylie Cyrus as Mrs. Claus. JK! She plays herself, of course. (Scott) ‘The Nightingale’ (No rating, 1:40, in Mandarin, Guangxi-dialect Chinese and French) The virtues of understatement and restraint are vividly apparent in this beautifully photographed French-Chinese production about a country-bred grandfather’s journey with his petulant urban granddaughter through rural Guangxi Province. The film gracefully sidesteps pitfalls of mawkish sentiment. (Webster) ‘Paranormal Activity: The Ghost Dimension’ (R, 1:35) Despite the customary jolts and agreeable humor, this closing installment to the found-footage horror series seems more like an afterthought than a resounding finale. (Webster) ★ ‘The Peanuts Movie’ (G, 1:28) Charles M. Schulz’s characters are just the way you remember them (if you’re old enough to remember them, that is). In this animated feature film, Charlie Brown is smitten by a new neighbor, the Little Red-Haired Girl, but is repeatedly thwarted in his efforts to impress her. It’s refreshing to see an animated children’s story that isn’t about princesses and threatened kingdoms, but about the small problems that real-world children face. (Genzlinger) ★ ‘Peggy Guggenheim: Art Addict’ (No rating, 1:37) Lisa Immordino Vreeland’s sleek, entertaining portrait of the collector who assembled one of the great troves of modern art is well organized, with hundreds of beautiful images spanning decades of artists Guggenheim knew, galleries she ran, parties she hosted. Using tapes of interviews before she died in 1979, the documentary is imbued with Guggenheim’s presence, even as art-world denizens dish on her foibles and vanities. (Gold) ‘The Perfect Guy’ (PG-13, 1:40) Michael Ealy is the creep and Sanaa Lathan is the woman who can’t get rid of him in this generic stalker movie. Mr. Ealy developed a convincing vacant stare when he played a humanoid police officer on television in “Almost Human,” and he employs it to chilling effect here, but the story goes exactly where you expect. (Genzlinger) ‘Room’ (R, 1:58) Brie Larson and an exceptional child actor, Jacob Tremblay, play mother and son in the adaptation of Emma Donoghue’s novel. Written by Ms. Donoghue and directed by Lenny Abrahamson, the movie flickers with grace and imagination during its initial half but devolves into a dreary, platitudinous therapy movie in its second. (Dargis) ‘Secret in Their Eyes’ (PG-13, 1:51) The sluggish, semi-coherent remake of the 2010 Argentine film that won an Oscar for best foreign picture has far less crackle than an average episode of “Law and Order.” It is notable only for the marquee value of its stars: Julia Roberts, Nicole Kidman, and Chiwetel Ejiofor. (Holden) ‘Sicario’✓ (R, 2:01) Emily Blunt plays an FBI agent caught up in nefarious doings on the United States-Mexico border in this violent fable, directed by Denis Villeneuve. Brutal and suspenseful, the film almost lives up to its potential to transcend the usual genre machinery and reveal some of the deep moral ambiguities of the drug war. (Scott) ‘Spectre’ (PG-13, 2:28) Bond, James Bond, etc. (Dargis) ★ ‘Spotlight’ (R, 2:07) A team of Boston Globe investigative reporters — played by Michael Keaton, Brian d’Arcy James, Rachel McAdams and Mark Ruffalo — takes on the local archdiocese in this powerful fact-based newspaper procedural, directed by Tom McCarthy. The movie, with a superb cast and a tightly constructed script, is an unflinching investigation of systemic moral rot and a rousing defense of the values of professional journalism. (Scott) ★ ‘Steve Jobs’ (R, 2:02) This three-panel portrait of the Apple co-founder, written by Aaron Sorkin and directed by Danny Boyle, portrays Jobs (Michael Fassbender) as a complicated, ambitious man caught in a tangle of messy personal and business relationships. Isolating Jobs at three crucial moments in his career, the film plays like a fast, busy backstage comedy and ends up being a richly intelligent exploration of our ambivalence about technology, genius and consumer capitalism. (Scott) ‘Suffragette’ (PG-13, 1:47) Carey Mulligan plays Maud Watts, a laundry worker in London in 1912 who becomes a militant supporter of women’s voting rights. In telling her story, Sarah Gavron (the director) and Abi Morgan (who wrote the screenplay) hit a few soft and sentimental notes, but they also explore the vital and still relevant connection between feminism and class consciousness in modern democratic politics. (Scott) ‘The Summer of Sangaile’ (No rating, 1:28 in Lithuanian) Heady, voluptuous and painfully superficial, this soft-core frolic in teenage Sapphic bliss from the Lithuanian writer and director Alante Kavaite presents an opposites-attract romance as a hymn to infatuation and a sonnet to afterglow. (Catsoulis) ‘Sweet Micky for President’ (No rating, 1:29) The story of Michel Martelly’s unlikely journey from pop star to president of Haiti is inherently interesting, but this documentary by Ben Patterson doesn’t try to do anything but present the glossy version of it. Mr. Martelly was elected in 2011, in the aftermath of the 2010 earthquake, but the film stops there, presumably because to look at his uneven record in office would tarnish rather than burnish. (Genzlinger) ★ ‘Taxi’ (No rating, 1:22) Shot almost entirely with a dashboard-mounted video camera, Jafar Panahi’s latest film — his third since the Iranian government banned him from practicing his craft in 2010 — is a wry meditation on the slippery boundary between movies and reality and a pointed work of social criticism. What seems like a random series of encounters turns out to be an elegantly shaped and poignant parable of modern urban life. (Scott) ‘The 33’ (PG-13, 2:06) The story of the Chilean miners who were trapped underground after an accident in 2010, told with solid, earnest emotion and a few bursts of star power, notably from Antonio Banderas and Juliette Binoche. (Scott) ★ ‘Theeb’ (No rating, 1:40, in Arabic) The title character in the “Arabic western,” set in 1916 and heavily influenced by Sergio Leone, is a Bedouin boy stranded in the desert with the mercenary who killed his older brother. The survival drama is as tough as it is picturesque. (Holden) ‘Trumbo’ (R, 2:04) This clunker about the blacklisted screenwriter Dalton Trumbo (Bryan Cranston) tells a great-man story with a patchwork of fact and fiction, mixing in the odd bit of newsreel with a great many dull, visually flat and poorly lighted dramatic scenes. Jay Roach directed. (Dargis) ★ ‘Truth’ (R, 2:01) The title of “Truth,” a gripping, beautifully executed journalistic thriller about the events that ended Dan Rather’s career as a CBS anchorman, should probably be appended with a question mark. More than most docudramas about fairly recent events, it is so well-written and acted that it conveys an eerie illusion of veracity. (Holden) ★ ‘The Walk’ (PG, 2:03) Think of the sometimes irritating first hour as a vaudevillian warm-up act, with the song-and-dance man Joseph Gordon-Levitt doing his best to entertain you with circus tricks and a French accent. He’s playing Philippe Petit, whose high-wire walk between the towers of the World Trade Center in 1974 is the subject of Robert Zemeckis’s uneven but ultimately enthralling new film. Once Petit and his co-conspirators arrive in New York, the movie becomes a wondrous and charming daredevil act of its own, as Mr. Zemeckis uses his mastery of digital techniques to turn a fondly remembered stunt into a thrilling and touching caper. (Scott) Film Series Chung Mong-hong (Monday through Wednesday) “I saw this body was empty. So I settled in.” Both prosaic and shiversome, these two sentences from the thriller “Soul” go a long way toward showcasing the genre-hopping gifts of Mr. Chung. BAMcinématek is screening all four of the Taiwanese director’s features, including “Soul” (Monday at 7:30 p.m.) and the stranger-than-fiction documentary “Doctor” (Wednesday at 7 p.m.), about the haunting parallels between an Iowa doctor’s dead son and another young man. Mr. Chung will participate in Q. and A. sessions after both “Soul” and the black comedy “Parking” (Tuesday at 7:30 p.m.). BAM Rose Cinemas, 30 Lafayette Avenue, at Ashland Place, Fort Greene, Brooklyn, 718-636-4100, bam.org. (Eric Grode) Film 101: Canon Fodder (through Dec. 27) This enterprising brunch series would warrant mention just for the shameless subtitle, but the films are pretty nifty, too. IFC Center continues its efforts to expose high school students to some of the greats – complete with free admission and free popcorn at some showings. Coming offerings include “Tokyo Story” (Friday through Sunday), “The Rules of the Game” (Dec. 11 through 13) and “Citizen Kane” (Dec. 25 through 27). 323 Avenue of the Americas, at Third Street, Greenwich Village; 212-924-7771, ifccenter.com. (Grode) Lonely Places: Film Noir and the American Landscape (Saturday, and through Dec. 20) You can’t really have film noir without the “noir” part, right? All those ominous assignations and foreboding clouds of cigarette smoke just wouldn’t be the same in the daytime. Well, this intriguing Museum of the Moving Image retrospective tests this notion with 15 films set everywhere from Chuckwalla, Nev., (“Desert Fury”) to wintry upstate New York (“On Dangerous Ground,” Dec. 18 and 20). The mean streets of Los Angeles remain a common setting in films like “The Crimson Kimono” (Saturday at 2 p.m.) But as this series makes clear, the streets can be plenty mean way out in the swamps or the mountains or even the Technicolor desert. On various days, 35th Avenue at 37th Street, Astoria, Queens, 718-784-0077, movingimage.us. (Grode) William Cameron Menzies (Friday through Dec. 10) Now here’s something you don’t see every day: a 31-film series dedicated to a man who created many things that people had never seen. Menzies had his share of success as a director, with such credits as the still dazzling “Things to Come” and, along with Sam Wood, “Pride of the Yankees.” But his greatest fame and influence came as a production designer responsible for visualizing everything from flying carpets (“The Thief of Bagdad”) to the burning of Atlanta (“Gone With the Wind,” which won Menzies a special Academy Award for outstanding achievement in the use of color for the enhancement of dramatic mood). The Menzies biographer James Curtis will introduce several screenings this week, including the John Barrymore silent film “Tempest” on Friday at 7 p.m. Film Forum, 209 West Houston Street, west of Avenue of the Americas, South Village, 212-727-8110, filmforum.org. (Grode) Sound and Fury: The Films of Cy Endfield (Tuesday through Dec. 8) First Cy Endfield was booted off the RKO lot during a purge of Orson Welles’s Mercury Productions team, but not before becoming one of the very few people to have seen the mythic uncut version of Welles’s “The Magnificent Ambersons.” The next displacement was a bigger one: After being blacklisted in 1951, Endfield moved to Britain, where he wrote and directed movies under various pseudonyms. This Anthology Film Archives series includes works from before and after the move. Endfield’s daughter, Suzannah Endfield Olivier, will be at several screenings, as will Brian Neve, the author of the new book “The Many Lives of Cy Endfield: Film Noir, the Blacklist and Zulu.” 32-34 Second Avenue, at Second Street, East Village, 212-505-5181, anthologyfilmarchives.org. (Grode) Turkeys for Thanksgiving (through Sunday) If you have a hard time gauging whether your turkey is ready or even past its prime, you’re in good company: Hollywood has been getting this wrong for decades. This BAMcinématek retrospective turns its attention to titles that got little love from audiences and studio heads alike – at first, as well as some titles that remain at the kiddie table of critical consensus to this day. BAM Rose Cinemas, 30 Lafayette Avenue, at Ashland Place, Fort Greene, Brooklyn, 718-636-4100, bam.org. (Grode) Todd Haynes: The Other Side of Dreams (through Sunday) Has any other major filmmaker made the switch from enfant terrible to period-picture master craftsman without losing one ounce of street cred? The enormous gap between scandalous early works, such as “Superstar: The Karen Carpenter Story,” and the recently released “Carol,” with its sumptuously shot same-sex romance in 1950s New York, has left room for go-for-broke fantasias on both glam rock (“Velvet Goldmine”) and Bob Dylan (“I’m Not There”). This wide-ranging retrospective pairs each of Mr. Haynes’s films with other titles chosen by the director himself, including those by Douglas Sirk, Rainer Werner Fassbinder and, less intuitively, Russ Meyer. Walter Reade Theater, Lincoln Center, 165 West 65th Street, 212-875-5601, filmlinc.com. (Grode) W.C. Fields in Astoria (Sunday) It’s been 100 years since the Ziegfeld Follies introduced audiences to William Claude Dukenfield (a.k.a. W.C. Fields), a virtuoso juggler in a top hat and cutaway collar. Before long, the juggling had been (mostly) mothballed in favor of Fields’s new persona: a bibulous rapscallion who liked big words far more than little kids. This character was on display in subsequent “Follies,” in Broadway musicals and in several silent films, including some that were shot at Astoria Studios, across the street from the Museum of the Moving Image’s current location. That museum is paying tribute to the anniversary with a pair of 1926 silent movies that were filmed there: “It’s the Old Army Game” with Louise Brooks at 5 p.m., and “So’s Your Old Man” at 7 p.m. If nothing else, this offers a rare chance to see the singularly unattractive clip-on mustache that Fields favored in his silent films, reportedly because he knew audiences hated it so much. 35th Avenue at 37th Street, Astoria, Queens, 718-784-0077, movingimage.us. (Grode) A version of this article appears in print on , on Page C 20 of the New York edition with the headline: The Listings: Movies . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              