   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Movies Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Summer 2015 Movie Releases: A Look at What’s Coming Image Carla Gugino and Dwayne Johnson face seismic activity in “San Andreas.” Credit Jasin Boland By  Anita Gates May 1, 2015 May 6 I Am Big Bird: The Caroll Spinney Story Mr. Spinney, the man wearing Big Bird’s bright yellow beak, fluffy feathers and distinctive orange legs for the last 45 years, is a white-bearded 81-year-old now. This documentary, directed by Dave LaMattina and Chad N. Walker, tells his “Sesame Street” story, including the early years with Jim Henson. May 8 Bravetown A jaded teenage dance-club D.J. in New York receives cruel and unusual punishment for a minor drug infraction. He’s banished to a small town in North Dakota, where he must stay with his estranged father and undergo counseling. Lucas Till stars as the young D.J., with Kherington Payne as the small-town dance-team captain, Laura Dern as her mother and Josh Duhamel as the therapist. Daniel Duran wrote and directed. The D Train Class reunions can bring out the worst in anybody. In this comedy, Jack Black’s insecure reunion committee chairman becomes obsessed with persuading his most famous high school classmate (a scruffy, arrogant James Marsden) to attend. Written and directed by Jarrad Paul and Andrew Mogel. With Kathryn Hahn and Jeffrey Tambor. 5 Flights Up Diane Keaton and Morgan Freeman star as a couple whose longtime home is now worth a fortune, thanks to Brooklyn chic. They list it (just to see), but then their elderly dog gets sick, the news media go crazy over a report of terrorists on the Brooklyn Bridge, and they go apartment-hunting. They find something! Richard Loncraine directed this drama and (apparent) real estate fantasy. Image Diane Keaton and Morgan Freeman in “5 Flights Up.” Credit James Hamilton Hot Pursuit Reese Witherspoon and Sofia Vergara play up their physical differences in an action comedy. Ms. Witherspoon is a diminutive cop assigned to protect the tall, voluptuous Ms. Vergara, who is scheduled to testify against a drug lord with a habit of killing witnesses. Directed by Anne Fletcher, who dealt with odd couples in “27 Dresses” and “The Proposal.” Intrepido: A Lonely Hero (“L’Intrepido”) Antonio Albanese stars in this Italian satire about a lonely man who takes temp jobs to feel useful. Gianni Amelio directed. Maggie  Arnold Schwarzenegger stars in this horror thriller as a Midwestern farmer facing a zombie epidemic. The complication is that his daughter (Abigail Breslin, who’s 19 now), for whom he’d do anything, has been infected. Henry Hobson’s directorial debut. Noble Deirdre O’Kane stars in the true story of Christine Noble, who grew up slum-poor, motherless, institutionalized and homeless in Ireland, then decided to devote her adult life to helping abandoned and orphaned children in Vietnam beginning in the 1980s. With the help of Bates (well, Brendan Coyle of “Downton Abbey”) and Davos Seaworth (actually, Liam Cunningham of “Game of Thrones”). Stephen Bradley wrote and directed. The 100 Year-Old Man Who Climbed Out the Window and Disappeared From Sweden, a comedy about a retirement-home resident who decides it’s time to escape and have a new adventure. It may be significant that he used to be a dynamite expert. Robert Gustafsson stars. Felix Herngren directed. 1001 Grams From Norway, a romantic comedy about recalibrating the national Norwegian kilo. Bent Hamer wrote and directed this story of a bored scientist in a bad marriage who goes to Paris for a seminar and meets a guy who is seriously into weights and measures. Ane Dahl Torp and Laurent Stocker star. Piku A father-daughter road-trip drama from India. Shoojit Sircar directed. Playing It Cool Chris Evans is a disillusioned screenwriter who thinks romantic comedies are all lies — and promptly lives out every one of the genre’s clichés. Michelle Monaghan is the perfect woman he meets and pursues. Too bad he kind of lied about being a wealthy philanthropist. With Aubrey Plaza, Luke Wilson, Anthony Mackie and a bearded Topher Grace. Justin Reardon directed. Preggoland A party-loving single 35-year-old — the kind of woman who’d bring a sex toy as a gift to a baby shower — is surrounded by friends having kids. Feeling excluded and loserly, she blurts out a lie — that she’s pregnant — and is forced to keep up the bluff. Sonja Bennett stars in her own screenplay; Jacob Tierney directed. James Caan plays her delighted father. Saint Laurent He took over the House of Dior when he was 21. He tried to introduce a fragrance called Opium — and got away with it. From France, nine intense years in the life of a fashion designer with issues, starring Gaspard Ulliel as Yves Saint Laurent. Nominated for 10 César awards, including best actor, director (Bertrand Bonello) and picture. (It won for best costume design.) The Seven Five Michael Dowd was a police officer in the 75th Precinct in East New York, Brooklyn. He robbed drug dealers, sold cocaine and ran his own crime ring. This documentary, directed by Tiller Russell, explains why, when Mr. Dowd was finally arrested in 1992, it was not by his own precinct but by Long Island cops. Skin Trade Action-adventure time with Dolph Lundgren and a little touch of “Death Wish.” Directed by Ekachai Uekrongtham, Mr. Lundgren plays a detective heading to Bangkok to stop and destroy a human trafficker (Ron Perlman), who killed Mr. Lundgren’s wife and his daughter. It’s complicated. May 13 Forbidden Films: The Hidden Legacy of Nazi Film From Germany, a look at the 40 anti-Semitic, anti-British and anti-Polish propaganda movies made by the Third Reich that are still considered too offensive or inflammatory to be broadcast or publicly screened. Felix Moeller wrote and directed. One Cut, One Life Ed Pincus left New York and pretty much retired from documentary filmmaking (“Black Natchez,” “Diaries”) decades ago to run a flower farm in Vermont. When Mr. Pincus learned he had a terminal illness (which progressed into leukemia), he and his co-director, Lucia Small, got out their cameras and made this one last documentary, to examine the art of living well while dying. His wife, Jane, was not enthusiastic about the intrusion. Mr. Pincus died in November 2013. May 15 Absolution More human traffickers — this time, up against Steven Seagal. In Keoni Waxman’s action thriller, he’s a contract killer who meets a beautiful trafficking victim (Adina Stetcu) on the run from a mob boss (Vinnie Jones). Animals Drug addicts in love. David Dastmalchian and Kim Shaw play a clearly doomed young Chicago couple who sleep in a car, scam people to get by financially and live for heroin. Directed by Collin Schiffli, the film won a special jury prize at South by Southwest, where Variety praised its “uncommonly compelling persuasiveness.” Bombay Velvet Film noir from India. Anurag Kashyap directed this crime drama set during the 1960s. Childless On the day of a teenage girl’s funeral, the four adults in her life try to understand and take a hard look at their own lives. With Joe Mantegna, Barbara Hershey, Diane Venora and James Naughton. Written and directed by Charlie Levi. The Connection (“La French”) Marseilles in the ‘70s, and the answer to whatever happened to Jean Dujardin, after winning the best-actor Oscar for “The Artist.” This crime thriller is about the same criminal operation that Gene Hackman’s character battled in “The French Connection.” Mr. Dujardin plays a magistrate trying to bring down a powerful international heroin smuggler (Gilles Lellouche). Cédric Jimenez directed. Dark Star: H. R. Giger’s World From Switzerland, a documentary about the man who designed the creature in “Alien” and shared a visual effects Oscar for it. Mr. Giger, who died in 2014, was also a painter and sculptor and designed album covers, including Emerson, Lake & Palmer’s “Brain Salad Surgery.” Belinda Sallin directed. Echoes of War An actual western, with a bad-guy family (thieving Texas cattle ranchers) and a good-guy family (struggling Texas trappers) dealing with loss just after the Civil War. Kane Senes directed a cast led by James Badge Dale, Ethan Embry and William Forsythe. Every Secret Thing Elizabeth Banks as a small-town New York detective plagued by doubts. Eight years ago, on her first case, a toddler was kidnapped and killed by two little girls. Now the young killers (Dakota Fanning and Danielle Macdonald) are 18, out of juvenile detention and back in their hometown — where another child soon goes missing. Based on Laura Lippman’s novel and directed by the documentarian Amy Berg. With Diane Lane (as a manipulative mom), Nate Parker and Common. The Film Critic (“El Critico”) From Argentina, a romantic comedy about a jaded Buenos Aires movie reviewer who considers romantic comedies the lowest form of cinematic art. Then his life turns into one. Hernán Guerschuny directed. Good Kill Ethan Hawke stars as a drone operator who fights a Middle East war from the safety of a trailer in Nevada. Then he goes home to his wife (January Jones) for dinner. A drama written and directed by Andrew Niccol (“Gattaca”). With Bruce Greenwood and Zoë Kravitz. I’ll See You in My Dreams Blythe Danner stars as a 70-something widow and retired teacher who has pretty much curled up into a ball emotionally, except for her beloved dog. When it dies, she’s forced to open up — to karaoke, to weed, to the pool man (Martin Starr), to her pals (among them, Mary Kay Place and Rhea Perlman) and to the guy who walks into the golf club one day (Sam Elliott). The Guardian called the film “a bona fide crowd pleaser” when it was at Sundance in January. A romantic comic drama from Brett Haley. In the Name of My Daughter From France and the master André Téchiné, Catherine Deneuve as a glamorous casino owner in 1970s Nice. The drama begins when her daughter (Adèle Haenel) moves back home, falls in love with Maman’s formerly trusted adviser (Guillaume Canet), commits a major betrayal by trying to get control of the casino for a Mafia connection and disappears. Thirty years later, Maman is determined to see justice done. Know How A group of teenagers in foster care in New York wrote the script and tell their own stories in this musical drama, directed by Juan Carlos Pineiro Escoriaza. L for Leisure In the early ‘90s, various graduate students take various lazy vacations around the world and think about life. Lev Kalman and Whitney Horn directed this episodic comedy. The cast includes Gabriel Abrantes, Melissa Barrera and Bene Coopersmith. Mad Max: Fury Road Hail and farewell, Mel Gibson; there’s a new Max in town. Tom Hardy stars in this action adventure, which George Miller, who started it all and directed the original trilogy, says is set about 45 years from now. (Warn your children.) Mr. Miller returns from the land of G ratings (“Happy Feet”) to take us back to the postapocalypse, where desperate people drive off-road crazy, gun control is not an issue, and all good things are lost (even Charlize Theron’s hair). Our Man in Tehran Ar, go make a documentary about the true story behind the film “Argo.” Ken Taylor, the former Canadian ambassador to Iran who hid six Americans in his official residence, tells the story of the plan and the escape. Drew Taylor and Larry Weinstein directed. Pitch Perfect 2 Those wacky a cappella singers from Barden University are back, including Beca (Anna Kendrick) and Fat Amy (Rebel Wilson). In this comedy-musical sequel, the group tries to redeem itself by winning an international competition. With Skylar Astin, Brittany Snow and Hailee Steinfeld. Elizabeth Banks directed. Pound of Flesh Organ theft in China. If you’re going to steal the kidney of an organ donor trying to help a dying relative, it’s probably best that your victim not be a former black-ops agent (Jean-Claude Van Damme). There will be revenge and action scenes. Ernie Barbarash directed. Slow West Another actual western, complete with bounty hunters. A 16-year-old Scottish boy (Kodi Smit-McPhee) travels across the American West to reunite with his true love (Caren Pistorius). Luckily for him, a mysterious traveler (Michael Fassbender) decides to join him and protect him against the outlaw (Ben Mendelsohn) on his trail. Directed by John Maclean. The Surface Sean Astin and Chris Mulkey star in this thriller about two strangers, both in bad shape, who meet in the middle of Lake Michigan. Mr. Astin has called it a two-hander “meditation on hopelessness and suicide.” Gil Cates Jr. directed. Time Lapse Does free will exist? Or is there only destiny? In this science-fiction thriller, three roommates discover a device that takes photographs 24 hours into the future. They see it as an opportunity to make money, but disturbing things begin to happen. With Danielle Panabaker, Matt O’Leary and George Finn. Bradley King directed. Two Shots Fired  (“Dos Disparos”) From Argentina and Martin Rejtman, an existentialist comedy about a 16-year-old who inexplicably shoots himself in the stomach and the head and survives — but it’s mostly about the irrational behavior his family members exhibit afterward. The cast includes Rafael Federman, Benjamin Coehlo and Laura Paredes. Where Hope Grows David DeSanctis, an actor with Down syndrome, plays a bullied grocery-store clerk with Down syndrome whose attitude toward difficulties inspires a former baseball player (Kristoffer Polaha) who suffers from panic attacks. Chris Dowling wrote and directed. May 20 Güeros From Mexico, a homage to the French new wave and the 1960s. Alonso Ruiz Palacios directed this story of three young men in Mexico City and a beautiful young woman who is a leader of the local student-protest movement. The film won two prizes, including best cinematography, at last year’s Tribeca Film Festival. May 22 Aloft A family drama about faith healing, falconry and forgiveness, set in the Arctic Circle. Jennifer Connelly stars as a woman who abandons her children when she learns she can heal. Cillian Murphy is her son, who 20 years later sets out to find her. From the Peruvian director Claudia Llosa (“The Milk of Sorrow”), with Mélanie Laurent and Oona Chaplin. (Dis)Honesty — The Truth About Lies Dan Ariely, a behavioral expert, explains why so many of us tell untruths but still consider ourselves wonderful, upright, honest people. A documentary from Yael Melamede. The Farewell Party From Israel, a dark comedy about friendship and D.I.Y. euthanasia. When one man in a Jerusalem retirement home learns he has an irreversible illness, another — a former inventor — agrees to create a device that will help him die with dignity. Moral complexities arise. With Ze’ev Revach and Levana Finkelshtein. Sharon Maymon and Tal Granit wrote and directed. Love at First Fight This French romantic comedy won three Césars this year — best actress, most promising new actor and best first film. Adèle Haenel plays a young survivalist determined to prepare for the coming apocalypse. Kévin Azaïs is the bored small-town boy who is so intrigued by her that he goes along with her to boot camp. Thomas Cailley directed. Poltergeist This horror-remake screenplay is by David Lindsay-Abaire, whose stage work has ranged from “Rabbit Hole” to “Shrek the Musical,” so that’s intriguing. Sam Rockwell and Rosemarie DeWitt are the unfortunate couple who move their family into the wrong suburban house — one built on top of a cemetery. Little Kennedi Clements is the poor little girl who gets sucked into another dimension by enraged spirits. (At least the character’s name isn’t Carol Anne anymore; it’s Madison.) Jared Harris is the ghostbuster who may be able to get her back. Gil Kenan directed. And the television screen is much, much larger than the one from 1982. Image Kennedi Clements meets interactive TV in “Poltergeist” Credit 20th Century Fox Seeds of Time Plants can become extinct, just as animals do. Sandy McLeod’s documentary is about Cary Fowler, a crop-diversity expert, and his fight to keep many threatened food sources alive. Something Better to Come Hanna Polak’s Russian-Polish documentary about people who live in Svalka, a garbage dump outside Moscow, outdoes “Boyhood” in one way: It’s said to have been filmed over a total of 14 years. Sunshine Superman The subject is the cinematographer Carl Boenish, father of the BASE movement (parachuting from fixed structures or cliffs), who died in 1984 after a Troll Wall mountain-range jump in Norway. Directed by Marah Strauch. Tomorrowland George Clooney, last seen stealing art back from the Nazis, stars as a disillusioned former boy genius. Britt Robertson (she was Angie in “Under the Dome”) is the eager teenage science nut who teams with him to explore another dimension, where the world appears to be dominated by beautiful wheat fields with a distant view of a city built by theme-park designers. Brad Bird wrote (with Damon Lindelof of “Lost”) and directed. When Marnie Was There From Japan, an animated version of a 1960s British novel by Joan G. Robinson. The loneliest little girl in the world goes away to a seaside town and finally makes a friend, but there may be something otherworldly about the two girls’ connection. The English voice cast is led by Hailee Steinfeld and Kiernan Shipka. Winning: The Racing Life of Paul Newman Mr. Newman’s fans know that he was a racecar driver as well as an Oscar-winning actor and salad-dressing philanthropist, but not everyone knows that the man actually won four national championships behind the wheel. Or that he didn’t start racing until he was 47. Adam Carolla and Nate Adams’s documentary tells the story, with appearances by Robert Redford, Tom Cruise and Joanne Woodward. May 27 Survivor Always nice to see a former James Bond playing a bad guy. Pierce Brosnan stars as a vicious assassin after a Foreign Service officer (Milla Jovovich) who has been framed for a terrorist bombing. With James D’Arcy (who played Anthony Perkins in “Hitchcock”), Emma Thompson, Angela Bassett and Dylan McDermott. James McTeigue directed. May 29 Aloha Bradley Cooper and Emma Stone together in Hawaii in Cameron Crowe’s first film since “We Bought a Zoo.” It’s a romantic-triangle comedy about a military contractor, his long-ago girlfriend (Rachel McAdams) and the surprisingly adorable Air Force liaison (Ms. Stone) assigned to him. With Alec Baldwin (in uniform and yelling) and Bill Murray. Barely Lethal Hailee Steinfeld, teenage spy! In this action comedy directed by Kyle Newman, Ms. Steinfeld plays a special ops agent who wants out and fakes her own death. But when she starts a new life as a high school exchange student, she learns that international espionage did not taught her the meaning of real treachery. With Samuel L. Jackson and Jessica Alba. Club Life Jerry Ferrara, best known as Turtle on HBO’s “Entourage,” stars as a young man who turns to the club scene when he needs fast money to pay his father’s medical bills. The question in this New York-based drama: Is he getting in too deep? Fabrizio Conte directed. Gemma Bovery An update of “Madame Bovary,” Flaubert’s 19th-century novel about adultery in the country. A young couple with the attention-getting names Gemma and Charles Bovery (Gemma Arterton and Jason Flemyng) move into a village near Rouen, France, where the novel was set. Fabrice Luchini plays the ex-Parisian Flaubert fan who sees other parallels as well. From Posy Simmonds’s graphic novel of the same name. Anne Fontaine (“Coco Before Chanel”) directed. Heaven Knows What Ah, to be young, madly in love and living in New York City! It’s the addicted-to-heroin part that makes this not a romantic comedy. Arielle Holmes (on whose life the film is based) and Caleb Landry Jones star. Josh and Benny Safdie directed. I Believe in Unicorns Teenage girl finds love with older boy, but he turns violent. And that’s where her rich fantasy life comes in handy. Leah Meyerhoff’s directorial debut, starring Natalia Dyer and Peter Vack. Results The private lives of personal trainers. A newly rich client (Kevin Corrigan) and a gym owner (Guy Pearce) vie for the affections of a no-nonsense trainer played by Cobie Smulders. A romantic comedy written and directed by Andrew Bujalski. Image Cobie Smulders and Guy Pearce in “Results.” Credit Magnolia Pictures Runoff An American farm drama about hard times and hard decisions. Joanne Kelly stars as a farm wife facing financial and medical crises who finds out just how far she’ll go to save herself and her family. Written and directed by Kimberly Levin. San Andreas There goes the Hollywood sign! In Brad Peyton’s earthquake action-adventure, the long-feared Big One hits California, and a rescue helicopter pilot (Dwayne Johnson) is determined to save his wife (Carla Gugino) in Los Angeles and their daughter (Alexandra Daddario) in San Francisco. (The San Andreas fault is more than 800 miles long.) Sunset Edge A coming-of-age Southern Gothic thriller set in an trailer park. Written and directed by Daniel Peddle. The True Cost In the past two decades, there has been a 500 percent increase in clothing purchases. The United States, which manufactured 90 percent of its clothing in the 1960s, now makes just 3 percent. Andrew Morgan’s documentary looks at the global fashion industry and its vast human and environmental costs. You’re Sleeping, Nicole (“Tu Dors Nicole”) From the Canadian director Stéphane Lafleur, a just-come-of-age comic drama, shot in black and white, about one young woman’s lazy summer disrupted by the arrival of her brother and his band mates. Julianne Côté, Catherine St-Laurent and Marc-André Grondin star. When it was screened at Cannes, The Hollywood Reporter described it as “affecting, funny and eccentric.” Unfreedom Set half in New York and half in New Delhi, this double tale of religious fundamentalism follows a Muslim terrorist who kidnaps a liberal Muslim scholar and a young lesbian being forced into an arranged marriage. Raj Amit Kumar’s directorial debut is a crime-drama-romance hybrid, starring Victor Banerjee, Bhana Uday, Bhavani Lee and Preeti Gupta. June 3 Entourage Ari the agent is now a studio head. Vincent the movie star wants to direct. The whole gang returns from the HBO series about a guy from Queens who makes it big in Hollywood and brings along his old pals. Written and directed by Doug Ellin, who created the series. Adrian Grenier, Jeremy Piven, Kevin Connolly, Kevin Dillon and Jerry Ferrara star. Billy Bob Thornton also turns up. Every Last Child Politics and the polio outbreak in Pakistan. Tom Roberts’s documentary follows five people whose lives have been affected. A Pigeon Sat on a Branch Reflecting on Existence From Sweden, an absurdist comedy in which two traveling salesmen have trouble unloading vampire fangs, and King Karl XII, visiting from the 18th century, walks into a bar. With Nils Westblom, Holger Andersson and Viktor Gyllenberg. Roy Andersson (“A Swedish Love Story”) directed. June 5 Alleluia From Belgium, a crime thriller about an expert hustler, womanizer and con man (Laurent Lucas). But in his latest victim (Lola Dueñas), a meek single mom, he meets his match, and they go on a rampage, cheating other lonely widows and divorcées. Things turn gory. Directed by Fabrice Du Welz. Dukale’s Dream Six years ago, Hugh Jackman went to Ethiopia as a humanitarian ambassador and met a young coffee farmer, Dukale, who inspired him. This documentary, directed by Josh Rothstein, covers their friendship, Dukale’s entrepreneurial progress and the stories behind free-trade coffee and clean technology. Freedom Cuba Gooding Jr. stars as Samuel, an escaped Virginia slave bound for Canada in a drama set in both 1856 and 1748. Bernhard Forcher plays the 18th-century slave-ship captain who brought over Samuel’s great-grandfather and was transformed by the experience. Peter Cousens directed. With William Sadler, Sharon Leal, David Rasche and Terrence Mann. Gloria Gloria Trevi, a deliberately outrageous pop star of the ‘80s and ‘90s, was known as the Mexican Madonna until a sex scandal destroyed her career. Sofía Espinosa stars as Gloria, and Marco Pérez plays Sergio Andrade, her manager and lover, who had an unfortunate attraction to underage girls, preferably in multiples. A musical biodrama from Mexico and the Swiss-born director Christian Keller. Hungry Hearts Adam Driver, best known from HBO’s “Girls,” stars with Alba Rohrwacher in an Italian psychological thriller shot in New York. After meeting cute (trapped in a restaurant restroom), the two marry and have a child, but a severe case of postpartum depression and paranoia could lead the new mother to starve her baby. The two leads won best actor and actress honors at the Venice Film Festival. Saverio Costanzo directed. Insidious: Chapter 3  A horror prequel written and directed by Leigh Whannell, the franchise’s co-creator. Long before Elise the psychic (Lin Shaye) helped the haunted Lambert family, she got her start by agreeing, reluctantly, to help a teenage girl targeted by a dangerous supernatural entity. With Dermot Mulroney and Stefanie Scott. Image Lin Shaye, center, and Angus Sampson, right, in “Insidious: Chapter 3.” Credit Matt Kennedy/Focus Features Love & Mercy John Cusack is Brian Wilson (the older, complicated one), and so is Paul Dano (the young, vital one). Bill Pohlad directed this musical biography and describes his subject as “not a huge fan of social interaction.” Back to the surfer, good-vibrations ‘60s with the Beach Boys. Elizabeth Banks plays his wife. Patch Town Ever feel guilty about packing away an old toy that has a face? In the world imagined by the director Craig Goodwill, you are a bad, bad person. Certain babies, it seems, are born in the factory equivalent of cabbage patches, sold to children as dolls and then reclaimed to work as slave labor. Rob Ramsay plays an abandoned toy who sets out to find his adoptive mother and a real home again. Spy When you need a C.I.A. agent to infiltrate an arms dealer’s world and prevent global disaster, who ya gonna cast? Melissa McCarthy, if you’re making a comedy. Ms. McCarthy stars alongside Jason Statham, Jude Law, Rose Byrne, Allison Janney, Curtis Jackson (a.k.a. 50 Cent) and Miranda Hart. Written and directed by Paul Feig of “Bridesmaids” fame. Testament of Youth In World War I, Vera Brittain, a young British feminist, lost her fiancé, her brother and best male friend — and a generation lost its newness. Alicia Vikander stars in this coming-of-age period drama based on Ms. Brittain’s 1933 wartime memoir and directed by James Kent. With Kit Harington (Jon Snow on “Game of Thrones”), Taron Egerton, Hayley Atwell and, as Vera’s parents, Emily Watson and Dominic West. Image Kit Harington and Alicia Vikander as the memoirist Vera Brittain in “Testament of Youth.” Credit Sony Pictures Classics United Passions For soccer-history fans. Gérard Depardieu, Fisher Stevens, Tim Roth and Sam Neill star in the story of the men who kept FIFA from going under after World War I and went on to make the World Cup a reality. From France (bien sûr), a drama directed by Frédéric Auburtin. The first World Cup competition was held in Uruguay in 1930. Wild Horses Robert Duvall wrote, directed and stars in this drama with James Franco and Josh Hartnett. A Texas Ranger (Luciana Duvall, the director’s wife) opens a 15-year-old missing-persons case, and clues point to a powerful rancher (Mr. Duvall), who has enough trouble right now with the return of his estranged son (Mr. Franco), whom he threw out 15 years ago because he was gay. Connection? June 12 Chagall-Malevich From Russia, a little fact and a little folklore in a period (1917-18) drama about the Russian-born artist Marc Chagall, his return to his childhood home and his rivalry with the painter Kazimir Malevich. With Leonid Bichevin, Anatoliy Belyy and Kristina Schneidermann. This is the director Alexandr Mitta’s first film in more than a decade. The 11th Hour Kim Basinger stars in a dark thriller about a successful married businesswoman who has been trying to conceive a child for a decade. Now told that she’s too old, she begins to hear voices (calling her Mommy) and make strange plans. Written and directed by Anders Morgenthaler. With Jordan Prentice, Peter Stormare and Sebastian Schipper. Jurassic World All these years later, that lush island off the coast of Costa Rica has a functioning dinosaur theme park that looks as wholesome as Disneyland. But attendance is down, so the owners decide to introduce a new attraction. What could possibly go wrong? And should Chris Pratt’s character really be doing behavioral research on velociraptors? With Bryce Dallas Howard, Judy Greer, Vincent D’Onofrio and B. D. Wong. Colin Trevorrow directed. Live from New York! A documentary about the 40-year-old phenomenon that is NBC’s “Saturday Night Live.” Directed by Bao Nguyen. Featuring the whole darned gang, from Dan Aykroyd to Sasheer Zamata. Madame Bovary If she had just stuck to the extramarital affairs, she might have been all right. But Emma Bovary, a country doctor’s bored young wife, turns into a shopping addict as well. Mia Wasikowska (“Jane Eyre”) stars, with Paul Giamatti, Henry Lloyd-Hughes, Logan Marshall-Green, Ezra Miller and Rhys Ifans, in this adaptation of Flaubert’s 1856 novel. Sophie Barthes directed. Me and Earl and the Dying Girl They loved this at Sundance (where it won both the grand jury prize and audience award). Thomas Mann stars as a high school senior and amateur filmmaker whose kindhearted mother (Connie Britton) asks him to do something for her: Be nice to a classmate who has cancer. Set Fire to the Stars It’s the early 1950s, the Manhattan literati are sipping their martinis, and Dylan Thomas, the Welsh poet-king of excess, is scheduled to visit. In Andy Goddard’s drama, Elijah Wood plays the young academic (and ardent admirer) assigned to pull the great man together. Celyn Jones (who wrote the screenplay with Mr. Goddard) plays Thomas, who died in New York in 1953. Vendetta Dean Cain, almost two decades past his “Lois & Clark” days, stars in this action thriller about a detective who will do almost anything to avenge his wife’s murder. He arranges to be arrested and sent to prison, where he can get to the man who did it. Mr. Cain’s co-star is Paul Wight, known to W.W.E. fans as Big Show. Jen and Sylvia Soska directed. The Wolfpack It sounds like a Jerzy Kosinski novel. Six brothers and a sister are locked away in a Lower East Side apartment nearly all their young lives because their father (a Peruvian immigrant and Hare Krishna devotee) is afraid New York City will contaminate them. They watch movies constantly and re-enact them with homemade costumes and props. But Crystal Moselle’s film is a documentary — about the Angulo family, nicknamed the Wolfpack, whom she met in 2010. It won the documentary grand jury prize at Sundance. The Yes Men Are Revolting This is the third documentary by and about Andy Bichlbaum and Mike Bonanno, the prankster activists known as the Yes Men. This time Greenpeace, a United Nations climate change conference and Homeland Security are involved. When the film was screened at the Toronto International Film Festival, Variety called it “about as easy a sit as they come.” Directed by the Yes Men and Laura Nix. June 17 The Tribe No spoken dialogue and no subtitles in this Ukrainian film about a deaf teenager (Grigoriy Fesenko) trying to prove himself at a new boarding school for the hearing-impaired where bullies rule. The writer and director, Myroslav Slaboshpytskiy, goes with nonverbal acting and sign language instead. The film — which depicts these students involved in gangs, robbery, bribery and prostitution — won the Critics’ Week grand prize at Cannes last year. When it screened at the New Director/New Films series, Manohla Dargis, writing in The New York Times, called it “tough, visually audacious” and “a slice of art-film miserablism.” June 19 Burying the Ex A horror comedy from Joe Dante. Max did not kill his live-in girlfriend, Evelyn, but he wanted to. And he was kind of relieved when she died in a freak accident. But just as he finds a new dream girl, Evelyn returns from the grave and has strong feelings about getting Max back. With Anton Yelchin, Ashley Greene and Alexandra Daddario. Dope A comic drama about a teenager (Shameik Moore) in a tough Los Angeles neighborhood who sets aside college applications and SAT worries to go to an underground party. Maybe now he’ll get past his geekness. Rick Famuyiwa directed. Eden The 1990s Parisian electronic dance scene in a musical drama directed by Mia Hansen-Love. Image Félix de Givry spins in “Eden.” Credit Broad Green Pictures Face of an Angel Michael Winterbottom’s new drama is based on a book about the Amanda Knox case, but the names have been changed. Daniel Brühl stars as a director who may make a film of a book by an Italy-based American journalist (Kate Beckinsale) about the trial. Appalled by the news media frenzy in Siena, he begins to rethink his plan. Gabriel Rory Culkin stars as a teenager trying to carry on after his father’s suicide. Lou Howe wrote and directed. Infinitely Polar Bear Dad is bipolar, and Mom has left him with the kids. Mark Ruffalo stars as a manic-depressive from a wealthy Boston family who is still poor, and Zoe Saldana is his wife, who goes to New York to get her M.B.A. so they can afford to live. That’s Keir Dullea as the blue blood grandfather. Written and directed by Maya Forbes. Inside Out An animated comedy about emotions and the voices inside our heads from Pete Docter, who gave us “Up,” “Monsters, Inc.” and stories for “Toy Story” movies. A girl — with the guidance of the command station in her brain — tries to cope with her parents and the family’s move from the Midwest to San Francisco. With the voices of Amy Poehler, Bill Hader, Lewis Black, Mindy Kaling and Phyllis Smith. Manglehorn Al Pacino turns down the bluster as an emotionally repressed loner, a small-town Texas locksmith who has never gotten over the loss of the love of his life. Holly Hunter plays the bank teller who may be his last chance at love. David Gordon Green directed. The Overnight Taylor Schilling and Adam Scott play spouses who are new to Los Angeles in Patrick Brice’s couples comedy. Meeting new people (Jason Schwartzman and Judith Godrèche) and making a date turn into major strangeness. Phantom Halo Dad gambles, Dad drinks, and money is a problem. So one son decides to help by taking up counterfeiting, a plan that does not go smoothly. This crime thriller is directed by Antonia Bogdanovich, whose parents are Peter Bogdanovich and Polly Platt. Starring Thomas Brodie-Sangster, Luke Kleintank, Sebastian Roché and Rebecca Romijn. Rubble Kings Shan Nicholson’s documentary about New York City gangs in the early 1970s, how bad things were and how peace was made. 3 1/2 Minutes: 10 Bullets In November 2012, a white man at a Florida gas station complained about the loud music in the car next to him, argued with a black teenager and fired 10 bullets at the car, killing a 17-year-old. The young men in that car were unarmed. Marc Silver’s documentary reconstructs the crime and visits the trial. At Sundance, it won a special jury award for social impact. June 24 What Happened, Miss Simone? Nina Simone, that is. Liz Garbus directed this documentary about the artist, who grew up in North Carolina, studied classical piano at Juilliard, sang jazz and folk, became a voice of the civil rights movement and attracted an almost religious following. Ms. Garbus’s former subjects have included Bobby Fischer and Marilyn Monroe. Simone died in France in 2003. June 26 Batkid Begins: The Wish Heard Around the World A documentary about one of the splashiest Make a Wish Foundation efforts ever. On Nov. 15, 2013, Miles Scott, a 5-year-old with leukemia, found San Francisco turned into Gotham City just for him and a day set aside to be his favorite superhero. Dana Nachman directed. Miles’s disease is now in remission. Big Game Lots of 13-year-old boys in the Finnish countryside have proved their manhood by spending a night in the wild with only a bow and arrow. But when Oskari’s time comes, things turn dramatic. He witnesses a plane crash and finds the president of the United States (Samuel L. Jackson) in the Air Force One escape pod. Time to run from the terrorist kidnappers and try to find the Special Forces team, both on their way. Jalmari Helander directed this action drama, filmed in Germany. With Onni Tommila, Victor Garber, Felicity Huffman and Jim Broadbent. A Borrowed Identity Eyad, a Palestinian Israeli, is the first Arab to be accepted into a prestigious boarding school in Jerusalem. He tries desperately to fit in, then falls in love with a Jewish girl (Daniel Kitsis) and has some life-altering decisions to make about who he is and who he wants to be. Eran Riklis directed this Israeli drama. Tawfeek Barhom plays Eyad. Difret From Ethiopia, a drama about a young girl’s abduction (for marriage purposes) and the lawyer who helps her plead self-defense after she fights back. Zeresenay Berhane Mehari directed. Tizita Hagere stars. It won audience awards at both the Berlin International Film Festival and Sundance. Felt Amy, a traumatized artist, reacts to male aggression by taking on male-form alter egos, which has the desired effect but at a major cost. Amy Everson stars in this thriller based on her own experiences. Directed by Jason Banker. Fresh Dressed A documentary about hip-hop and its relationship to fashion. The director Sacha Jenkins’s interview subjects include Kanye West, Pharrell Williams and André Leon Talley. Into the Grizzly Maze Thomas Jane as an Alaskan sheriff in a horror thriller about a giant bear terrorizing a small town. The sheriff goes into the woods looking for his wife (Piper Perabo), an ecologist, but runs into his ex-con brother (James Marsden) and — unfortunately — the grizzly (Bart the Bear, a busy 1,000-pound Kodiak film actor). David Hackl directed. A Little Chaos Kate Winslet stars as Sabine de Barra, a landscape designer who in 1682 lands a major new job: designing one of the gardens at Versailles for Louis XIV (Alan Rickman). Difficulties with court etiquette, class barriers and gender discrimination arise, but there’s also surprise bonding. Mr. Rickman directed this romantic drama. Stanley Tucci plays the king’s brother, Philippe. The Little Death A suburban Sydney sex comedy. From Josh Lawson, an Australian writer and director and a star of “House of Lies,” the secret lives of five couples who have fetishes. The cast includes Damon Herriman (Dewey Crowe on “Justified”), Kate Box, Erin James, Mr. Lawson and his brother Ben Lawson. Max The title character is a badly injured Marine who saw his best friend killed on the front lines in Afghanistan. Understandably, he has post-traumatic stress syndrome and growls. Max is a Belgian Malinois (his breed mates guard the White House). Boaz Yakin’s family adventure stars Lauren Graham, Thomas Haden Church and Josh Wiggins as the dead human Marine’s family members, who adopt the dog, a move that has good and bad consequences. The Pardon Toni Jo Henry was an abused child in the Depression-era South, a prostitute in her early teens and the only woman Louisiana ever sent to the electric chair. Jaime King plays Toni in Tom Anton’s period drama, and Jason Lewis is her husband, who is in prison when she commits a grisly murder with his old partner. The Princess of France (“La Princesa de Francia”) From Argentina and the director Matías Piñeiro, a drama about a Buenos Aires repertory company preparing a radio production of “Love’s Labour’s Lost” and finding that its members’ lives are becoming strangely Shakespearean. With Julián Larquier Tellarini, Agustina Muñoz and María Villar. 7 Minutes In this crime thriller, three desperate young men plan a robbery down to the last detail, so they’ll be “in and out in seven minutes.” Sure they will. The cast includes Jason Ritter, Luke Mitchell and Kris Kristofferson. Jay Martin wrote and directed. Ted 2 Even foulmouthed teddy bears deserve happiness, and in this comedy sequel, Ted (the voice of Seth MacFarlane) marries a beautiful blond human and wants to have a baby. That means, among other things, a visit to a sperm bank with his best pal (Mark Wahlberg) and a court case to prove that Ted is a person. With Amanda Seyfried, Jessica Barth and Morgan Freeman. Mr. MacFarlane directed. Image Amanda Seyfried and Mark Wahlberg, with the Boston teddy bear Ted (voiced by Seth MacFarlane). Credit Universal Pictures/Media Rights Capital July 1 Faith of Our Fathers In 1969, two young dads serve together in Vietnam. In the 1990s, their grown sons meet at the Vietnam Veterans Memorial in Washington and talk about religious beliefs. The cast, directed by Carey Scott, includes Stephen Baldwin, Kevin Downes, David A. R. White and Candace Cameron Bure. Magic Mike XXL Mike left the stripper game behind, but he’s back three years later to help the other guys retire in style, with one last big, big show in Miami. Directed by Greg Jacobs. Channing Tatum, Joe Manganiello, Matthew Bomer, Adam Rodriguez, Gabriel Iglesias and Kevin Nash return from the original movie. The title is not a Roman numeral. A Poem Is a Naked Person Les Blank’s 1974 documentary about the blues-rocker Leon Russell is only now being released. The film offers gospel, bluegrass, barrelhouse piano and rock-influenced blues; a blend of Southern and ‘60s counterculture values; and visits by George Jones and Willie Nelson. Terminator Genisys Mother against son, Terminator against Terminator, and plot-driving time travel. Arnold Schwarzenegger is indeed back; Emilia Clarke of “Game of Thrones” plays Sarah Connor; and Jason Clarke is John Connor, or whatever he’s become, who pays a visit from the future to 1984 in this, the fifth “Terminator” film, directed by Alan Taylor. With Jai Courtney and J. K. Simmons. Image Emilia Clarke and Jai Courtney in “Terminator Genisys.” Credit Melinda Sue Gordon July 3 Cartel Land Modern-day vigilante groups with a shared enemy: the Mexican drug cartels. Some 60,000 have died in recent years in the seemingly unending wars for drug territory. This documentary, directed by Matt Heineman, won directing and cinematography prizes at Sundance. In Stereo David and Brenda, a terribly modern 30-something couple, try to figure out how to be together without being together. A dark romantic comedy directed by Mel Rodriguez III. Beau Garrett and Micah Hauptman star. Jimmy’s Hall Ken Loach’s newest drama is set in 1920s Ireland — when Jimmy Gralton (Barry Ward) opens a rural dance hall, much to the consternation of local officials and disapproving priests — and a decade later, when Jimmy returns from exile and decides to do it again. Brian F. O’Byrne plays a fascist leader. Stray Dog "You got to do something to feel alive,” says Ron Hall, whose nickname gives this documentary its title. That’s why he’s a hard-drinking biker and maybe why he dedicates himself to helping fellow Vietnam War veterans. Directed by Debra Granik, who made her reputation with “Winter’s Bone” (in which Mr. Hall appeared). July 10 The Bronze Melissa Rauch of “The Big Bang Theory” shows off her nasty side as a bitter former Olympic gymnastics champion (she won the bronze medal) who treats everyone in her hometown like dirt. A decade later, she’s offered a pile of money to train a promising young gymnast, but that would mean sharing her celebrity status. Bryan Buckley directed. Do I Sound Gay? David Thorpe wondered just that about himself and made a documentary on the subject, including the history of the “gay voice” in film and on television. Commenters include David Sedaris, George Takei, Margaret Cho and Tim Gunn. The Gallows Found-footage horror starring Cassidy Gifford (daughter of Frank and Kathie Lee) and directed by Chris Lofing. Twenty years ago, during a high school play in a small town, a young actor was accidentally hanged. The school decides to stage the same play, as a commemoration. Yeah, that ought to go well. Mad Women A dark satire about women who want to change the world. One woman commits a crime of conscience and comes out of prison convinced that she can change the world. At the same time, her middle daughter joins Doctors Without Borders. With Kelsey Lynn Stokes, Christina Starbuck, Jamie Harrold and the New York stage actor Reed Birney. Minions They’re tiny, yellow and cylindrical; they wear goggles and overalls; and they live to serve evil. The minions, first seen in “Despicable Me” and now in their own animated spinoff, seek a new supervillain to serve and find Scarlet Overkill (the voice of Sandra Bullock). Pierre Coffin does the voices of all three minions (Kevin, Bob and Stuart). Mr. Coffin and Kyle Balda directed. Nowitzki: the Perfect Shot A documentary for basketball fans. The story of Dirk Nowitzki, who went from playing in his native Germany to finessing an unblockable jump shot and leading an American team (the Dallas Mavericks) to an N.B.A. championship. Secret weapon: his coach and mentor, Holger Geschwindner. Leopold Hoesch directed. The Paulo Coelho Story Mr. Coelho, the Brazilian author (“The Alchemist,” “The Pilgrim”) and rock musician, as seen by the director Daniel Augusto. Self/Less Ryan Reynolds and Ben Kingsley in a science-fiction thriller whose moral may be “Immortality has side effects.” A billionaire dying of cancer (Mr. Kingsley) has his mind transplanted into the body of a healthy young man (Mr. Reynolds), giving him a new start. But hmmm, where did that young body come from? Tarsem Singh directed. Matthew Goode looks evil as the go-between, and Michelle Dockery, as the billionaire’s estranged activist daughter, brings a lot of Lady Mary from “Downton Abbey.” Tangerine Christmas Eve for Los Angeles prostitutes. Sin-Dee, back on the streets after 28 days in lockup, hears a rumor that her pimp boyfriend has been unfaithful to her and sets out to learn the truth. A drama directed by Sean Baker. With Kitana Kiki Rodriguez and Mya Taylor. 10,000 KM From Spain, the trials — comic and dramatic — of a long-distance relationship. He’s in Barcelona, she’s in Los Angeles for a year, and technology can do only so much. The leads, Natalia Tena and David Verdaguer, won a special acting-duo jury prize at South by Southwest. Carlos Marques-Marcet directed. What We Did on Our Holiday David Tennant and Rosamund Pike star as Doug and Abi, a couple who have decided to separate but don’t want to ruin Doug’s father’s big 75th birthday party in Scotland. So they swear their three boisterous children to secrecy. A British comic drama based on the BBC sitcom “Outnumbered,” written and directed by its creators, Andy Hamilton and Guy Jenkin. Billy Connolly, resplendent in a long white beard, plays the birthday guy. July 15 Court This drama about India’s judicial system was named best debut at the Venice Film Festival. Various court cases reveal the influences of caste, feudalism, patriarchy, apathy and bureaucracy. Written and directed by Chaitanya Tamhane. The cast includes Pradeep Joshi, Usha Bane and Vivek Gomber. July 17 Ant-Man Why not? Ants are very tiny and very strong, and so is Scott Lang (Paul Rudd) when he puts on his special Ant-Man suit. So he can help his mentor (Michael Douglas) with a heist that will save the world. Directed by Peyton Reed, with a cast including Evangeline Lilly, Corey Stoll, Michael Peña, Bobby Cannavale and the very busy Judy Greer. Marvel keeps ‘em coming. Image Paul Rudd in “Ant-Man.” Credit Zade Rosenthal/Marvel Ardor Gael García Bernal and Alice Braga star in Pablo Fendrik’s adventure about a mysterious man who emerges from the Argentine rain forest. But he’s a good guy, out to save a woman kidnapped by land grabbers. Boulevard In one of Robin Williams’s last films to be released, he plays Nolan, an older man in a separate-bedrooms kind of marriage who, late in life, takes his first step out of the closet. He picks up a male hustler. Kathy Baker plays the wife, and Roberto Aguire the hustler. Dito Montiel directed. When this drama was screened at the 2014 Tribeca Film Festival, Variety described Nolan as “one of the kindest characters Williams has ever played.” Irrational Man First, Woody Allen abandoned New York; now he has abandoned Europe. His latest writing and directorial effort was filmed in Rhode Island. All Mr. Allen will tell us is that it’s about “a tormented philosophy professor” who commits “an existential act” and thus regains the will to live. There is every reason to believe a student is involved. Starring Emma Stone, Joaquin Phoenix, Parker Posey and Jamie Blackley (who was Adam in “If I Stay”). The Look of Silence Three years ago, Joshua Oppenheimer released “The Act of Killing,” an Oscar-nominated documentary about the 1960s Indonesian massacres (some call it genocide). Now he has created a companion piece about a family of survivors, including an optometrist who confronts the men who killed his brother while they’re in his office as patients. It won five prizes at the Venice Film Festival. Image A mother labors near her home in Indonesia in the documentary “The Look of Silence.” Credit Drafthouse Films/Participant Media Mr. Holmes Suddenly things aren’t as elementary as they used to be for Sherlock Holmes (Ian McKellen). And no wonder: It’s 1947, and his fictional heyday ended around 1914. His only companions at his retirement cottage are his housekeeper (a drabbed-down Laura Linney) and her young son (Milo Parker). Holmes puts the boy’s keen senses to work to help him solve a very personal case. Bill Condon directed. The Stanford Prison Experiment One of the most chilling psychological experiments ever conducted. In 1971, 24 college students were randomly assigned to one of two roles — prisoner or guard — in a simulated prison at Stanford University. The head scientist (played by Billy Crudup) was horrified at how fully and enthusiastically they took to their roles. This drama about the role of power, directed by Kyle Patrick Alvarez, was a double winner at Sundance. That Sugar Film Damon Gameau gave up sugar three years ago, but for the purposes of this documentary he took it up again — focusing on so-called healthy foods at the supermarket. The film offers lessons on the effects of a high-sugar diet on a healthy body; on where the sugar industry stands; and on where sugar lurks, just waiting to addict us. Trainwreck Amy Schumer in Judd Apatow’s latest grown-up comedy. She stars as a magazine writer who disdains love, scoffs at monogamy, eagerly sleeps around and doesn’t know what to do after going out with somebody she really likes (Bill Hader). With Colin Quinn, Brie Larson and Tilda Swinton. Ms. Schumer wrote the screenplay. July 24 American Heist Just one last bank robbery, and then they’ll go straight. Adrien Brody stars as the jailbird, bad influence and older brother of Hayden Christensen’s character, who has already turned his life around, thank you. Sarik Andreasyan directed this action drama. Jordana Brewster plays the younger brother’s vulnerable love interest. Dark Was the Night Those loggers probably shouldn’t have cut down that part of the forest. Now a perfectly nice small town is being rocked by violent, inexplicable events. This horror thriller from Jack Heller stars Kevin Durand as the sheriff and Lukas Haas as his deputy, who suddenly remember an old local legend about a monster in the woods. Horse Money  (“Cavalo Dinheiro”) From Portugal, a new documentary by Pedro Costa, about Fontainhas, a ghetto of Lisbon that has now been demolished, and the director’s friend Ventura. Lucky Stiff A musical comedy from Christopher Ashley about taking a dead body on a nice trip to Monte Carlo. Dominic Marsh plays the British salesman who will inherit $6 million if he follows his recently deceased uncle’s instructions perfectly. Otherwise, the money goes to a dog home in Brooklyn. With Jason Alexander and Nikki M. James. Lynn Ahrens, whose Broadway credits include “Ragtime,” is the writer. Paper Towns From a young-adult novel by John Green, who wrote “The Fault in Our Stars.” Cara Delevingne, the British model turned actress, stars as a high school girl who mysteriously disappears. Nat Wolff (Isaac in “The Fault in Our Stars”) is her childhood friend, who becomes obsessed with following a series of clues to find her. A coming-of-age story, directed by Jake Schreier. Image Nat Wolff and Cara Delevingne in “Paper Towns.” Credit Michael Tackett Phoenix From Germany, a drama about a Jewish concentration camp survivor in 1945. Nelly (Nina Hoss) returns to Berlin to search for her gentile husband (Ronald Zehrfeld), even though she suspects he may have been the one who turned her into the Nazis. Christian Petzold directed. Pixels We should have known that video arcades would lead to no good. In this Chris Columbus comedy, aliens from another galaxy have seen video feeds of arcade games and taken them as a declaration of war. Now the White House (Kevin James plays the president) has to call on old gamers (Adam Sandler, Peter Dinklage and Josh Gad) to save Earth from an invasion of larger-than-life-size versions of Pac-Man and Donkey Kong. Michelle Monaghan plays the requisite beautiful woman, this time an arms expert. Southpaw When bad things happen to rich people. Jake Gyllenhaal plays a middleweight boxing champion whose life falls apart after his wife dies tragically. Forest Whitaker is the washed-up ex-boxer who vows to get him off drugs, alcohol and self-pity and make him a new man. With Rachel McAdams, Curtis Jackson (a.k.a. 50 Cent) and Rita Ora. Antoine Fuqua (“Training Day”) directed. Unexpected Cobie Smulders stars as a dedicated high school teacher in a poor Chicago neighborhood. Just as the school where she works is closing, she also learns she’s pregnant — and so is one of her most promising students (Gail Bean). This could be the beginning of a beautiful friendship. Anders Holm is the teacher’s live-in boyfriend; Elizabeth McGovern is her mother. Kris Swanberg, whose previous films include “It Was Great, but I Was Ready to Come Home,” directed. The Young Kieslowski A comedy about two virgins who get drunk, have sex (with each other) and get pregnant. Ryan Malgarini and Haley Lu Richardson star. Kerem Sanga directed. July 29 Listen to Me Marlon This documentary makes “Mr. Brando come searchingly alive,” Manohla Dargis wrote in The Times when it was screened at New Films/New Directors in March, describing it as “an intimate, impressionistic portrait.” A lot of the story is told in Mr. Brando’s own words. Stevan Riley directed. July 30 The 7th Dwarf  (“Der 7bte Zwerg”) From Germany, an animated fairy-tale mash-up. The title character, Bobo (apparently the kid brother of Happy, Dopey and all the rest), accidentally injures Sleeping Beauty, knocking out the whole kingdom of Fantabularasa for a century. So the dwarfs have to time-travel, with the evil witch’s burned-out dragon, to make things right. Directed by Harald Siepermann and Boris Aljinovic. July 31 Best of Enemies When Gore Vidal (liberal) and William F. Buckley Jr. (conservative) used to debate their political views unscripted on live television, beginning in 1968, people watched. Because the two men got really angry and because they were both smart as hell. This documentary, directed by Morgan Neville and Robert Gordon, takes us back. The End of the Tour Jason Segel plays David Foster Wallace, the novelist who committed suicide in 2008. Jesse Eisenberg is David Lipsky, the Rolling Stone writer who did a five-day interview with Mr. Wallace during his 1996 book tour for “Infinite Jest.” Things got intense. Based on Mr. Lipsky’s book “Although of Course You End Up Becoming Yourself.” James Ponsoldt (“Smashed,” “The Spectacular Now”) directed. The Gift Joel Edgerton (Tom Buchanan in “The Great Gatsby”) wrote, directed and stars in this thriller about a man who makes trouble for a young couple (Jason Bateman and Rebecca Hall). First he brings impressive presents; then he reveals a dark, decades-old secret. The Kindergarten Teacher From Israel, the story of an obsession. A Tel Aviv teacher (Sarit Larry) discovers that a 5-year-old boy in her class is a brilliant. The poet Nadav Lapid directed. Manohla Dargis, writing in The Times, called this one of the standouts of the New Directors/New Films series. A Lego Brickumentary Lego bricks and the people who love them. This documentary, from Kief Davidson and Daniel Junge, visits Brickworld, one of the largest Lego conventions, and talks to enthusiastic A.F.O.L.s (Adult Fans of Legos). Jason Bateman narrates. Lila and Eve Viola Davis and Jennifer Lopez star as grieving mothers who meet in a support group, team up and take justice (some would say vengeance) into their own hands. A drama directed by Charles Stone III. Mission: Impossible — Rogue Nation Tom Cruise is back to prove that he can still kickbox, ride a motorcycle at a 90-degree angle, hang from a moving airplane and go shirtless at the age of 52. In this, the fifth installment of the “Mission: Impossible” film series, he’s up against the truly evil Syndicate, “the anti-I.M.F.” (Impossible Missions Force). With Jeremy Renner, Rebecca Ferguson, Simon Pegg and Alec Baldwin. From Christopher McQuarrie, who also directed Mr. Cruise in “Jack Reacher” (2012). The Second Mother Brazilian class barriers are explored in this family drama when the housekeeper’s estranged daughter, who doesn’t believe in the upstairs-downstairs divide, shows up and moves in. This is especially good news for the wealthy employers’ teenage son. Directed by Anna Muylaert. Regina Casé stars, with Michel Joelsas and Camila Márdila. It won the audience award at the Berlin Film Festival and a world-cinema prize at Sundance. Vacation You’d think little Rusty Griswold would have learned better from the original “Vacation” movies (starting in 1983), but he’s all grown up now (Ed Helms) and is taking his own wife (Christina Applegate) and their two sons on a cross-country trip to Walley World. Directed by John Francis Daley and Jonathan Goldstein. With Chevy Chase and Beverly D’Angelo as the grandparents. Like father, like son. Image From left, Skyler Gisondo, Steele Stebbins, Christina Applegate and Ed Helms in “Vacation.” Credit Hopper Stone August 7 Cop Car Kevin Bacon stars as a sheriff who is not pleased when two boys steal an abandoned police car and take it for a joy ride. A thriller directed by Jon Watts. The Cut This Turkish drama, set a century ago, travels from Mesopotamia to Cuba to North Dakota. A young blacksmith (Tahar Rahim) survives the 1915 Armenian genocide, becomes a forced laborer and tries to track down his daughters. Fatih Akin wrote the screenplay, with Mardik Martin (“Raging Bull,” “Mean Streets”), and directed. The Diary of a Teenage Girl In 1976 San Francisco, every teenager finds herself in her own way. Minnie (Bel Powley) doesn’t rebel against her party-loving mother (Kristen Wiig) directly; she just has an affair with Mom’s handsome boyfriend (Alexander Skarsgard). Based on Phoebe Gloeckner’s graphic novel and directed by Marielle Heller. Fantastic Four Marvel’s longest-running, most dysfunctional group of superheroes. This reboot stars Miles Teller as Mr. Fantastic, Kate Mara as the Invisible Woman, Michael B. Jordan as the Human Torch and Jamie Bell as the Thing, all of whom got their superpowers during a teleportation experiment gone wrong. Now they must team up to save the world from Dr. Doom (Toby Kebbell). Josh Trank directed. Image Kate Mara as Sue Storm in “Fantastic Four.” Credit Ben Rothstein The Great Man (“Le Grand Homme”) From France, a tale of the Foreign Legion and the urge to do the right thing. Jérémie Renier and Surho Sugaipov star as 21st-century Legionnaires in Afghanistan. Sarah Leonor directed. Kahlil Gibran’s The Prophet Salma Hayek produced and stars in this animated feature that combines the poetry of “The Prophet,” first published in 1923, with sequences directed by nine animators, including Bill Plympton. Masterminds A heist comedy starring Zach Galifianakis, Kristen Wiig and Owen Wilson. It’s the tale of a bored armored-car driver (Mr. Galifianakis) who is lured into a scheme and manages to steal $17 million in cash before things fall apart in ridiculous ways. Jared Hess (“Napoleon Dynamite”) directed. Jason Sudeikis is the strange hit man. Meru It’s a peak in the Himalayas, almost 22,000 feet tall, and this documentary follows the three climbers who first conquered it. Directed by Jimmy Chin and Elizabeth Chai Vasarhelyi. The New Girlfriend It’s bad enough for Claire (Anaïs Demoustier) when her best friend dies. It’s stressful enough when she tries to live up to her promise to watch over the friend’s husband and baby for the rest of their lives. It’s awkward when she finds the handsome husband (Romain Duris, from “Chinese Puzzle” and “Heartbreaker”) looking lovely in women’s clothes, which his wife was fine with — as long as it was in the privacy of their own home. This is the latest from François Ozon, and its genre is a matter of opinion. (Farce-drama hybrid is one suggestion.) Mr. Duris was nominated for a César for the role. Ricki and the Flash Meryl Streep picks up a guitar and the title role in this musical comic drama about a woman who sought rock-star fame and now must face her family. Kevin Kline is the husband she left behind; Audra McDonald is his new wife; Ms. Streep’s daughter Mamie Gummer plays her daughter; and Rick Springfield is a band mate. Directed by Jonathan Demme (“The Silence of the Lambs”) from a screenplay by Diablo Cody (“Juno”). Rosenwald Julius Rosenwald (1862-1932) was a high school dropout who became chief executive of Sears, Roebuck. He also directed an enormous amount of philanthropy toward African-American causes. This documentary, from Aviva Kempner, includes interviews with Maya Angelou, Julian Bond and George C. Wolfe. Tom at the Farm (“Tom à la Ferme”) From Canada, a psychological thriller about being the gay lover your boyfriend’s family didn’t know about. At the funeral, he meets his dead boyfriend’s extremely crazy brother (Pierre-Yves Cardinal). Xavier Dolan wrote (with Michel Marc Bouchard), directed and stars as Tom. August 12 How to Smell a Rose: A Visit With Ricky Leacock at His Farm in Normandy A documentary about a documentarian. Les Blank and Gina Leibrecht visited the British-born cinéma-vérité pioneer Richard Leacock and his partner, Valérie Lalonde, in France in 2000 and talked about filmmaking, drinking and cooking. Mr. Leacock died in 2011, Mr. Blank in 2013. August 14 Air A sci-fi thriller that proves you do not have the worst job in the world. Norman Reedus and Djimon Hounsou star as engineers charged with watching over the last people on earth, who are in suspended animation until the air is breathable again. The biggest occupational challenge is not going insane. Christian Cantamessa directed. David Gordon Green Presents the Mend John Magery directed this thriller about a man who goes on vacation with his girlfriend and mysteriously returns without her. Josh Lucas and Stephen Plunkett star. Fort Tilden Two aimless Brooklynites — Variety called them “a sort of sociopathic Romy and Michele” when this comedy was at South by Southwest — make a beach date with two new guys but have a lot of trouble getting there. Sarah-Violet Bliss and Charles Rogers directed. Image Clare McNulty and Bridey Elliott in “Fort Tilden.” Credit Brian Lannin Goodnight Mommy Manohla Dargis of The New York Times called it “a discovery” and a “creepy Austrian art-film shocker” when it was screened at the Toronto International Film Festival last year. Twin boys become very worried when their mother returns home after reconstructive facial surgery. She seems to have a new personality as unfamiliar as her new face. Severin Fiala and Veronika Franz directed. The Man From U.N.C.L.E. A tip of the hat to Robert Vaughn. The devastatingly handsome Henry Cavill takes over the role of Napoleon Solo, with the hunky heir Armie Hammer as Illya Kuryakin, in Guy Ritchie’s remake. It’s 1963, and the agents’ big concerns are the Soviets, a missing H-bomb and one very interesting car mechanic, played by Alicia Vikander. With Hugh Grant and Jared Harris. Meet the Patels A rom-com documentary about a young Indian-American man, Ravi Patel, trying to find true love. His traditional parents may help or hurt. Mr. Patel directed, along with Geeta Patel, his sister. People, Places, Things Too bad about that happy, fulfilled Brooklyn professor, graphic novelist and family man (Jemaine Clement). In this comedy from Jim Strouse, he’s now alone, living in a minuscule studio apartment in Queens and trying to figure out both single fatherhood and dating. If only he hadn’t found the mother of his children in a compromising position with their friend Gary during the twins’ birthday party! Straight Outta Compton The story of the rise of the seminal hip-hop group N.W.A. — including Ice Cube, Dr. Dre and Eazy-E — from the dangerous 1980s streets of Compton, Calif. From F. Gary Gray, who made his directorial debut with Ice Cube’s film “Friday.” Starring O’Shea Jackson Jr., Corey Hawkins, Jason Mitchell and Paul Giamatti. Ten Thousand Saints The East Village in the ‘80s. A Vermont kid named Jude (Asa Butterfield) goes to live with his estranged father (Ethan Hawke) in New York and makes a whole new life. A drama from Shari Springer Berman and Robert Pulcini, who gave us “American Splendor” and “The Nanny Diaries.” Underdogs Tiny mechanical foosball players come to life for a good cause in this animated adventure. A nasty bully has grown up to become a soccer star and has bought his hometown, which he plans to demolish. The good guys fight back in a match to reclaim the town. Directed by Juan José Campanella, with the voices of Matthew Morrison and Ariana Grande. August 19 Beltracchi: The Art of Forgery From Germany, a documentary about Wolfgang Beltracchi, who succeeded as an art forger for almost 40 years before being sent to prison. He was released in January and says plenty of his paintings are still hanging in museums and private collections, undetected. Arne Birkenstock wrote and directed. August 21 Criminal Kevin Costner, Gary Oldman and Tommy Lee Jones, together again 24 years after “J F K.” They’re joined by Ryan Reynolds in this action-adventure about a dead C.I.A. operative who never finished his last assignment. So the other agents transplant his memories and talents into another man. Their logical choice for a vessel: a completely nutty death-row prisoner (Mr. Costner). Ariel Vromen directed. Digging for Fire While a Los Angeles couple and their 3-year-old are house-sitting for the weekend, they discover a gun and what seems to be a human bone. Jake Johnson, Rosemarie DeWitt, Orlando Bloom and Anna Kendrick star. Directed by Joe Swanberg. Grandma Lily Tomlin plays the title character, a contentedly solitary misanthrope who is forced out into the world when her granddaughter (Julia Garner) turns up pregnant and in financial need. With Marcia Gay Harden, Judy Greer, Laverne Cox and Sam Elliott. A comedy from Paul Weitz. Learning to Drive Patricia Clarkson and Ben Kingsley star in a New York comedy. She’s a book critic whose marriage has just fallen apart. He’s a Sikh driving instructor considering an arranged marriage. Side by side in the front seat, they find things in common. Directed by Isabel Coixet. She’s Funny That Way Something for New York theater fans from Peter Bogdanovich, whose last directing gig was a 2007 documentary about Tom Petty. Owen Wilson stars as a Broadway director, Kathryn Hahn as his actress wife and Imogen Poots as his one-night stand, who decides to audition for his next play. Sinister 2 This horror sequel’s morals: Don’t let your children watch old home movies of brutal murders. Don’t move into a house where those murders took place. The writers (Scott Derrickson and C. Robert Cargill) are back from the original. Directed by Ciaran Foy. Starring Shannyn Sossamon and James Ransone. Sleeping With Other People Alison Brie (Trudy on “Mad Men,” Annie on “Community”) and Jason Sudeikis star as friends determined to keep their relationship platonic, just because they’ve both been complete failures at romance. With Adam Brody, Amanda Peet and Natasha Lyonne. Leslye Headland (“Bachelorette”) wrote and directed. Youth From Israel and Germany, Tom Shoval’s drama about a kidnapping scheme gone wrong. Two brothers (Eitan Cunio and David Cunio), worried about money because their father is unemployed, turn to crime. They just forget that it’s the Sabbath, and family members of their Orthodox Jewish victim won’t get the ransom call, because they won’t pick up the phone. August 28 Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon: The Green Legend Michelle Yeoh, Donnie Yen and Jason Scott Lee star in this sequel to Ang Lee’s 2000 martial arts spectacular. Yuen Wo-Ping directs. Hitman: Agent 47 A reboot of the 2007 film based on the Hitman video games. Rupert Friend stars this time as 47, who was genetically engineered to be an assassin and to be better than humans at everything. Unless an evil corporation figures out how to make a whole army of killers just like him. Aleksander Bach directs, video-game style. All dates are subject to change. This list was compiled with the assistance of Suzanne O’Connor. Correction :  An entry in the film listings in last Sunday’s Summer Movies special section referred incorrectly to the subject of the documentary “Sunshine Superman.” It’s about BASE jumping (parachuting from fixed structures or cliffs), not sky diving. The entry also misstated the year that the cinematographer Carl Boenish, father of the BASE movement, died. It was in 1984, not 1978. Correction :  An entry in the film listings in last Sunday’s Summer Movies special section, using information from a publicist, misstated the release date for “Mad Women,” a dark satire about women who want to change the world. It’s July 10, not July 24. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page AR 39 of the New York edition with the headline: Quakes, Wraiths and Body Weights . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Related Coverage Watch the Trailers: 14 Movies Coming This Summer May 1, 2015 Image Movies Seek Laughs With All Manner of Sex Scenes April 30, 2015 Image The Director Paul Feig Prepares ‘Spy’ With Melissa McCarthy May 1, 2015 Image Show All Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              