   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Theater Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Review: Good Art, Bad Men and Samuel Pepys in ‘17c’ Image Elizabeth DeMent, who plays Samuel Pepys’s wife, Bess, in “17c.” Credit Rebecca Greenfield Next Wave Festival: 17c NYT Critic's Pick Off Broadway, Play , Dance Play 1 hr. and 15 min. Closing Date: Nov. 17, 2017 Brooklyn Academy of Music - Harvey Theater , 651 Fulton St. 718-636-4100 More Information By  Laura Collins-Hughes Nov. 15, 2017 There is a moment in “17c,” Big Dance Theater ’s animated investigation of Samuel Pepys, when a 21st-century fangirl cradles her copy of his famously fascinating diaries. She holds the book with such comfort and fondness that you know there’s something cherished inside. But moral messiness also lurks within. A 17th-century Londoner whose vivid writing testifies to his bouts of infidelity, violence and sexual predation, Pepys poses a problem for his devotees that’s resonant right now for the rest of us, too: how to weigh what’s admirable in a man’s work against what’s inexcusable in his behavior. Conceived and choreographed by Annie-B Parson, “17c” is a mini-Restoration comedy in postmodern style — part celebration, part inquisition, with Pepys himself as the chief witness. Like Alexander Hamilton with the Reynolds pamphlet , Pepys spelled out his misdeeds and committed them to history. The show’s arrival at such a fraught cultural moment is something that its directors, Ms. Parson and Paul Lazar, could not have foreseen. But in its New York premiere at the BAM Harvey Theater, as part of the Brooklyn Academy of Music ’s Next Wave Festival, it reads like a refraction of our recent monster parade. Image From left, Kourtney Rutherford, Ms. DeMent, Paul Lazar and Cynthia Hopkins. Credit Rebecca Greenfield That may be why the text feels as dominant as it does in this physically eloquent production, whose design aesthetic is simultaneously lush (Oana Botez’s sumptuous period costumes, Joe Levasseur’s saturating jewel-tone lights) and spare (Joanne Howard’s modular set). From the start, when Cynthia Hopkins walks onstage and reads diary excerpts to the audience, the show knocks down the barrier of antiquated language. When Pepys uses the word “yard” in a physically graphic context, Ms. Hopkins asks the spectators if they know what he means. Nope? “It’s a penis,” she says. Pepys’s diary entries are bracingly frank, and so is this production, which trades the role of Pepys among several actors, the terrific Ms. Hopkins included. Elizabeth DeMent plays Pepys’s wife, Bess, and when a slow-motion ballet explores the dynamics of their marriage, her Pepys is Aaron Mattocks. Later, when Bess falls passionately and hilariously for her dance instructor, we watch Ms. DeMent writhe across the floor. For Pepys, Bess’s wandering affection is a taste of his own medicine, and he can hardly bear it. One of the show’s feminist interventions is to imagine Bess beyond her husband’s gaze. Another is its play within a play: snippets of “The Convent of Pleasure” by Margaret Cavendish, a Pepys contemporary railing against the status quo. Some of the loudest echoes of the present come in a long Pepys monologue delivered by Mr. Lazar with a nauseatingly garden-variety lecherousness. Sitting in an easy chair next to an electric fire, Pepys tells of his lust for his wife’s maid, and his determination to have her. Pepys was in his 30s at the time; the maid was a teenager. The show doesn’t mention that. Your mind will turn to Alabama anyway. Two Pepys aficionados, played by Kourtney Rutherford and Ms. DeMent, sit to the side of the stage. Bookish annotators, they provide context and commentary on a Pepys website , and quibble comically about petty details. But there’s a bigger, more poignant question, and they argue about that, too: This man they revere did some horrible things. If they see that clearly, do they have to give him up? Next Wave Festival: 17c NYT Critic's Pick Brooklyn Academy of Music - Harvey Theater 651 Fulton St. Brooklyn 718-636-4100 bam.org Category Off Broadway, Play , Dance Play Runtime 1 hr. and 15 min. Credits Conceived and choreographed by Annie-B Parson; Directed by Annie-B Parson and Paul Lazar Opened Nov. 13, 2017 Closed Nov. 17, 2017 This information was last updated on Nov. 17, 2017 17c Through Nov. 18 at BAM Harvey Theater, Brooklyn; 718-636-4100, bam.org. Running time: 1 hour 15 minutes. Related Coverage Husband and Wife, Marrying Art Forms Sept. 25, 2009 How to Summon the Comic (!) Spirit of Martha Graham Feb. 7, 2017 Image Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              