   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Health Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Abortion Pill Orders Rise in 7 Latin American Nations on Zika Alert Image Mifepristone, also known as RU 486, is a pill that induces an abortion. It is one the medications sold to Latin America women by Women on Web. Credit James Worrell/Time & Life Pictures/Getty Images By  Donald G. McNeil Jr. and Pam Belluck June 22, 2016 Orders for abortion pills by women in seven Latin American countries with Zika outbreaks increased after health officials in those countries warned that the virus might cause severe birth defects, according to a women’s organization supplying such pills. Orders from women in Brazil, Ecuador and Venezuela roughly doubled, while those from Colombia, Costa Rica, El Salvador and Honduras went up by from 36 percent to 76 percent, researchers said in a study published Wednesday by The New England Journal of Medicine. The authors of the study included a leader of the group based in Amsterdam that is supplying the pills, Women on Web , a nonprofit staffed by doctors helping women from countries where abortion is illegal or restricted to terminate unwanted pregnancies. Even with the increase in demand for abortion pills , the number of orders received by Women on Web from Latin America and the Caribbean in that time period was small: slightly more than 2,300 in the region, with about 1,600 of those in countries where health authorities had warned about Zika’s potential to cause brain damage. In the countries where Zika warnings were issued, there are typically about 3.5 million abortions per year, said Gilda Sedgh, the principal research scientist at the Guttmacher Institute , a reproductive health research organization which was not involved in the study. So, Dr. Sedgh said, “The increase in demand for abortion observed by the authors in countries affected by Zika could be spurious because Women on Web accounts for a small share of all abortions in that part of the world.” Video Pregnant women face challenges in Brazil, where the Zika virus has compounded fears about birth defects and access to safe, legal abortions is severely restricted. Published On May 18, 2016 The numbers could be “an early warning sign” of increased demand for abortion because of Zika, Dr. Sedgh said, adding that it is also possible that Women on Web “might have experienced an increase in demand as a result of increased visibility of their services when health advisories were issued.” Access to abortion has been a contentious issue for years in many of the countries affected by Zika, but Zika has brought fresh attention to the debate. In Latin America and the Caribbean, according to a recent study , there are about 6.5 million abortions each year. Most of them are illegal, and an estimated 750,000 women a year are treated for complications from unsafe abortions in the region, Dr. Sedgh said. Women’s rights groups have long pressed for abortion restrictions to be eased. The study looked at orders for pills between Nov. 17, 2015, when the Pan American Health Organization issued an alert saying Zika virus might be linked to a surge in infants born with tiny heads and damaged brains in Brazil, and March 2 of this year. It compared actual orders to the number that would have been expected based on orders during the previous five years. Women on Web has a history of defying legal restrictions in such countries, which sometimes block access to its website or seize the packages it sends. The nonprofit also asks women unable to pay for their prescription to write an email explaining why they needed the abortion pill and could not afford it. “Some of the emails that came in were heartbreaking,” said Dr. Abigail R.A. Aiken, a reproductive health researcher at the Lyndon B. Johnson School of Public Affairs at the University of Texas, Austin, and the lead author of the study. “The fear and desperation was really hard to read.” Zika Virus Rumors and Theories That You Should Doubt Here is a look at the most prominent rumors and theories about Zika virus, along with responses from scientists. Feb. 18, 2016 A woman from Venezuela wrote, “I contracted Zika 4 days ago,” adding: “I love children. But I don’t believe it is a wise decision to keep a baby who will suffer. I need an abortion. I don’t know who to turn to. Please help me ASAP!” An email from a woman in Colombia said, “Here Zika is a major problem and the health authorities do not help with it.” She added: “I have no resources at this time and want to ask for your help because fear overwhelms me. What if the baby is born sick?!” Even more than it has increased attention on restrictive abortion laws, the Zika crisis has highlighted the issues of access to contraception and ways that women are ill-informed about birth control or discouraged from using it in some of the countries. In the face of Zika, some countries have been working to increase the availability and use of contraception. Women on Web is an offshoot of Women on Waves , which was founded in 1999 by Dr. Rebecca Gomperts. Women on Waves originally sailed a Dutch boat to countries that outlawed abortion, took women on board and performed abortions outside a nation’s territorial waters. As internet access in poor countries increased, Dr. Gomperts began supplying mifepristone and misoprostol pills, a combination approved by the World Health Organization for abortion in the first 10 weeks of a pregnancy. The Women on Web site is posted in five languages and tops Google search results for “I need an abortion.”  Like the Science Times page on Facebook. | Sign up for the Science Times newsletter. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page A 11 of the New York edition with the headline: Orders for Abortion Pills Rise in 7 Nations on Zika Alert . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Related Coverage New F.D.A. Guidelines Ease Access to Abortion Pill March 30, 2016 Image The Dawn of the Post-Clinic Abortion Aug. 28, 2014 Image W.H.O. Cites Low to Moderate Risk of Zika’s Imminent Spread to Europe May 18, 2016 Image Show All Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              