   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Sunday Review Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Opinion Supported by Letters College Success, for All Jan. 28, 2017 Image Students from the City College of New York on graduation day. Credit Sam Hodgson for The New York Times Readers offer perspectives on how low-income young people can be helped to finish college. To the Editor: Re “ America’s Great Working-Class Colleges ” (column, Jan. 22): David Leonhardt calls attention to new research that shows the important role that working-class colleges play in helping graduates prosper and succeed. More than half the students who enter these colleges, however, fail to graduate, missing the lifetime benefits a college degree confers. My research at the City University of New York shows that health and social problems that interfere with academic success are one reason. Our surveys of representative samples of CUNY community college and undergraduate students show that about half report one or more, and a quarter report two or more, of eight conditions identified in the literature as disrupting academic progress. These are depression, anxiety, pregnancy or raising young children, partner violence, lack of health insurance, no regular medical provider, food insecurity and obesity. By helping students overcome the health and social problems that undermine academic success, universities serving low-income populations can contribute even more to reducing the educational, income, health and life satisfaction inequalities that characterize the United States. NICHOLAS FREUDENBERG New York The writer is a professor of public health at CUNY and director of Healthy CUNY, a university initiative to promote health for academic success. To the Editor: David Leonhardt’s column about working-class colleges beautifully spells out the power that education has to propel poor Americans into the middle class and beyond. Let’s hope that his article reminds state legislators of the great good that a college education can do for citizens of their states, and that the Ivy League is shamed into doing much more. One question, though: John B. King, President Obama’s education secretary, is quoted as saying, “These institutions have a moral and educational responsibility.” Why are only universities held to a moral standard of helping poor Americans? What about state and federal government, public schools and us citizens? We all have a role to play in helping the least among us realize their potential, and to ignore that responsibility is shameful. AMANDA ABRAMS Durham, N.C. To the Editor: It’s not that colleges fail to serve their students but that too many students are not college material in the first place. It takes a certain I.Q. and sound study habits to handle college-level work. Unfortunately, third-tier colleges have diluted the curriculum to the point that it is now little more than what is offered in high school. Yet despite the lowering of standards, dropout rates remain appallingly high. Something is terribly wrong with this picture. But we refuse to acknowledge the harm being done to students who would have been far better off attending community college to earn a certificate in a high-demand field. WALT GARDNER Los Angeles The writer’s Reality Check blog is published in Education Week. To the Editor: I am the son of a working-class family. My father, who was raised in an orphanage, was never afforded an education, restricting his earnings potential and upward mobility. I attended Brooklyn College, CUNY. My father advanced me the tuition money, a mere $50 a term, which I had to pay back. After military service, I began a career working for major companies and consulting firms. Supplementing my college education with graduate degrees that I earned at night, I soon moved up the corporate ladder to management positions. My Brooklyn College education propelled me into the upper middle class, providing me the opportunities that America has to offer. Many of my classmates shared the same experience. Children of bus drivers and street cleaners, they became professionals in varied fields, able to reap the rewards of our great society. KEN LEFKOWITZ Medford, N.J. To the Editor: David Leonhardt’s column rightly spotlights the vital role that public urban universities play as engines of opportunity and economic mobility, especially for low-income students. It starts with access. Public colleges and universities enroll nearly three-quarters of students. The sheer size of these institutions means that they have the potential to substantially increase economic mobility nationally. These schools can increase enrollment and maintain quality, something often missed in rankings. Scale is an asset. But access is only the first step. Public urban universities are leading the way with approaches to increase the number of low-income students who graduate, which is central to increasing overall graduation rates. These institutions are thoughtfully engaging K-12 school systems and community colleges to align student pathways, rethinking financial aid as a tool to support completion, and building relationships with employers to support career development. Public urban universities continue to innovate, and if paired with state reinvestment in public institutions, the positive effect we’re already seeing can grow exponentially. SHARI GARMISE Washington The writer is vice president of urban initiatives at the Association of Public and Land-Grant Universities. To the Editor: As David Leonhardt asserts, “Improving higher education should be a national priority.” After all, as Raj Chetty’s new research points out, colleges and universities play a pivotal role in helping students, especially students from low-income families, climb the economic ladder and build actual wealth. A critical component of that improvement in higher ed that is often overlooked is that nearly 40 percent of students graduate from college without any internship experience. For students from lower income families, many of the internships that are available to them are unpaid, and therefore unfeasible. A person would need to make $26 an hour to afford a one-bedroom unit in Washington, yet most government internships are unpaid. As a country, one of our goals should be to close the increasing wealth gap, and to achieve that, we must ensure that our graduates have sufficient experience. Unpaid internships isolate particular types of students who simply cannot afford to work without pay. Colleges and universities, some with endowments in the billions, must ensure that all students are granted the same opportunities. A simple sponsorship program for qualifying students that picks up the cost of that unpaid internship is a good way to start. CARLOS MARK VERA Founder, Pay Our Interns Washington  Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter (@NYTopinion) , and sign up for the Opinion Today newsletter . A version of this article appears in print on , on Page SR 10 of the New York edition with the headline: College Success, for All . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              