   Image Credit Collier Schorr for The New York Times. Stylist: Mary Inacio. Hair: Christopher Marrero. Makeup: Susie Sobol. Sections Skip to content Skip to site index Feature Laurie Metcalf Was Hiding in Plain Sight From “Lady Bird” to “Three Tall Women” to a revival of “Roseanne,” the 62-year-old actress is finally showing off the extent of her range. Credit Collier Schorr for The New York Times. Stylist: Mary Inacio. Hair: Christopher Marrero. Makeup: Susie Sobol. Supported by By  Willa Paskin Feb. 21, 2018 A unicorn, a monster, a phoenix, a machine, a heavyweight fighter, an astronaut, a superhero, a thoroughbred, a home-run hitter, a waitress juggling “16 entrees, 42 starters, 16 desserts,” a jazz virtuoso, LeBron James, Magellan, Snuffleupagus. The actress Laurie Metcalf has been compared to all of these things. To speak with her colleagues is to blush on her behalf. It is to hear words like “purity” and “devotion” and “work ethic,” delivered with the sober intonations of people doing all they can to rescue them from cliché. On a Saturday in early February, in a rehearsal space overlooking Times Square, light streaming through the double-height floor-to-ceiling windows, Metcalf was laboring over B, one of the three nameless characters in Edward Albee’s 1994 Pulitzer Prize-winning play, “Three Tall Women.” A restaging, directed by Joe Mantello and co-starring Alison Pill and Glenda Jackson, will open on Broadway in March, and the cast was gathered at the end of the second week of rehearsal. Metcalf, her short dark hair curling around her ears, in a gray cowl-neck sweater and skinny gray jeans that looked baggy on her, deftly glided around the working set — an elderly woman’s bedroom with a small vanity, a love seat, an armchair, a double bed — bracingly awake. She had traded in the Uggs she wore in that morning for a pair of thick-heeled black pumps, part of her costume. “Three Tall Women,” inspired by Albee’s adopted mother, with whom he had a deeply fraught relationship, is a metaphysically complicated play that starts with a conversation between an old woman, A; her health aide, B; and a younger lawyer, C; and becomes an interrogation of identity, memory, personality and time. Despite not having much plot, it has a twist. Metcalf describes it as “slippery.” She is drawn to material that she doesn’t entirely comprehend but that has a mood, a line, a joke, a stage direction that inspires strong emotion in her. “That’s the hook,” she says. “Ninety-seven percent of the play I don’t understand yet, but we’ll figure it out in the room. The other 3 percent I know exactly how to play it and how to help the audience have that initial gut feeling I had when I read it.” In the case of “Three Tall Women,” she was drawn in by the play’s melancholy exploration of aging and the unexpected humor of its bare-bones writing style — like the moment when C says to B, “I imagine I’ll marry and I’ll be very happy,” to which B replies only, “Well.” To Metcalf, that “Well” was full of comedic possibility, a whoopee cushion at a chair convention. In the rehearsal room, Metcalf found dozens of variations on throwaway phrases, energetically and speedily trying out “we know”s and “honestly”s in different registers and moods — furious, intimidating, apologetic, silly, exasperated, entreating. At one point, she delivered a “whee!” and twirled around, her arms fully extended above her head. Mantello, who has directed her in two other Broadway plays, describes her as a “monster in the room. She supplies you with such a variety and wealth of choices, and she doesn’t need a lot of guidance.” The theater, the medium that is closest to Metcalf’s heart, is one of the few art forms left that you can’t see whenever you want to: You can’t watch a play on YouTube or stream it on Netflix. You had to be there, or you can only ever hear tell of it. It’s too late to see Metcalf’s Tony Award-winning performance in last year’s “A Doll’s House Part 2,” Lucas Hnath’s riotous sequel to the original Ibsen play, in which she hilariously and brashly manspread onstage like a cowboy in a corset. Despite 40 years of theater roles, she’s best known for having played the lovably blundering Aunt Jackie in the blue-collar ’90s sitcom “Roseanne,” a part that made her famous and, in the fashion of hit TV, familiar. But it is Metcalf’s role in Greta Gerwig’s “Lady Bird,” her first film in nearly a decade, that has lately encouraged us to see her anew. In her Oscar-nominated performance as Marion McPherson, mother of the teenage Lady Bird, she gives a performance so layered, vital and precise that it retroactively casts a spotlight on the meticulous but accessible, methodical but electric work she has been doing for decades. At 62, Metcalf is now being widely recognized for what she has always been, an actress of remarkable power, range and skill, a pre-eminent chronicler of the American working woman. Metcalf would be the first to say that her current tear — which includes three Emmy nominations in 2016 for “Getting On,” “Horace & Pete” and “The Big Bang Theory”; that Tony Award in 2017; the current Oscar nomination; “Three Tall Women”; and a new season of “Roseanne,” the first in two decades, arriving in March — all goes back to being given such meaty parts at an age when most actresses are being forced into retirement. But she knew exactly what to do with these parts when she got them. “She is so hard-working,” says Will Frears, who directed Metcalf in a 2015 Broadway adaptation of “Misery.” “She is extraordinary in her desire to be extraordinary.” Mantello told me that one thing he particularly loves about rehearsing with Metcalf are the moments when she’s engrossed in a scene and hears him laugh: “She sort of glances out at me and laughs with me. She’s both in it and aware she’s entertaining me at the same time.” I saw this double-consciousness in the rehearsal room, when B, A and C are reminiscing about losing their virginity, and A turns to B and asks if it hurt. Metcalf, kindly, but with a knowing tease in her voice, responded, “Oh ... well, a little.” Mantello guffawed. Metcalf locked eyes with him and cackled back. But as her laughter faded, her face settled into something much sadder, nearly tearful. It was impossible to tell when, exactly, she fell back into the character or if she had ever really broken away from her at all. The first play Metcalf ever appeared in was a high school production of “Auntie Mame.” She had only a few lines, but on the first night, she accidentally got a laugh on one of them. She immediately tried to parse what exactly had happened, so it could happen once more. “I think that’s what hooked me,” she says, “wanting to have that experience again onstage but be in control. It’s a cool, powerful feeling to direct the energy of the room.” But Metcalf was too practical and shy to imagine she would become an actor. Raised in Southern Illinois by her mother, a librarian, and her father, a budget director for the state university system, she went to college at Illinois State University and studied anthropology and German. She thought she would become an interpreter, which, as she likes to point out, she did. But she ended up doing a couple of shows in the theater department, impressing Terry Kinney, a fellow student who was pals with Jeff Perry and Gary Sinise. In 1976, Metcalf joined them and five other actors in a theater company housed in a church basement in Highland Park, outside Chicago. The group saved money by taking the name of a failed theater company that had already incorporated as Steppenwolf. Austin Pendleton, who became a member of the company in the ’80s, says working with Steppenwolf was “like opening a broom closet and finding the future of American acting.” Joan Allen, John Malkovich, Glenne Headly and Tracy Letts are just some of the company’s other members, nearly all of whom are recognizable from television, movies or theater. In the beginning, they all had day jobs. Metcalf was a legal secretary who could bang out 120 words a minute. When work was over, they would head to the basement theater and work some more, a commune, an incestuous sibling society (Metcalf dated Kinney first and then Malkovich, before marrying Perry, the father of her oldest child, the actress Zoe Perry). They picked their plays, cast them, directed when they drew the short straw, drank beer, ushered, took tickets, cleaned the bathroom and sold subscriptions. They cast themselves in parts no one else would have let them play. Metcalf was a septuagenarian in “True West” and a 14-year-old girl. She stole a show as the ugliest, flirtiest woman in the world, gave a monologue with yarn in her mouth and played Laura from “The Glass Menagerie” as profoundly mentally ill, a performance that drew critics from Chicago and that the people who saw it still speak of in reverent tones. Metcalf was in her late 20s when her oldest daughter was born. She left her at home with a sitter every night that she appeared in the 1983 Off Broadway staging of Lanford Wilson’s “Balm in Gilead,” a performance that has become the stuff of Broadway legend. A vast ensemble piece, set around a scruffy New York City diner, it was memorably punctuated by Metcalf’s 20-minute monologue as the inane, sweet prostitute Darlene, who prattles on and on until both she and the audience are in tears. After being cast in “Roseanne” — during just a two-week visit to California to audition for some movies — she moved to Los Angeles, where she still lives. She raised three children with her ex-husband Matt Roth, who played her abusive boyfriend on “Roseanne.” Her oldest son is now grown, and Metcalf lives with her teenage son and 12-year-old daughter. When she won the Tony Award for “A Doll’s House Part 2,” she thanked them for allowing her to be away so much. Metcalf has previously referred to herself as a workaholic, but when I asked her if this was true, she amended: “I can’t even call it work. I’m a creative-a-holic. I love the tearing into new material.” She recalls filming a three-person scene during the first season of “Roseanne,” in which she didn’t have much dialogue. During a break, the director came over and said to her, “You know, you don’t have to be acting during this part, because you’re not on camera.” Recalling this moment three decades later, she still can’t keep the outrage from her voice. “That’s the strangest thing I’ve ever heard! What would I do, just drop out? Just pull the plug and go dead for a while as they’re sitting two feet away from me?” There is a brawny, brainy populism to her high artistry, reflected in the everyday women she likes to play. Aunt Jackie is a hysterically funny working-class neurotic, lost and searching. In a 20-minute monologue in “Horace & Pete,” Metcalf uses only her face to tell a genuinely erotic tale of middle-aged desire. In HBO’s “Getting On,” which ended in 2015, her Jenna James, a geriatric doctor with the bedside manner of a rude telemarketer, is a cringe-comedy buffoon, whom Metcalf gives a soul. In “Lady Bird,” Metcalf plays Marion McPherson with enough verve and eye rolls to transcend the cliché of the nagging mother, suggesting with her performance that adolescent energy may not fade, so much as age into a more potent vintage. Her characters are high-strung women in the thick of busy lives, whose interiors Metcalf, from the midst of her own busy life, evokes with care, ingenuity and intensity. “I’m not trying to blow out a camera lens or make the audience’s hair go straight back from my sheer volume, sheer energy level,” Metcalf says, but that doesn’t mean you shouldn’t hold onto your hat. At the end of the first week of rehearsal for “Three Tall Women,” I met Metcalf in a Theater Row restaurant, the kind that has a mad dinner rush before the shows start at 8. She arrived in a puffy coat and a bright orange hat topped with a grand gray pompom, the same gray cowl neck sweater she wore during rehearsal, jeans and a pair of running shoes. Metcalf is extremely slight and unassuming, yet substantial. Perfectly engaging, she is not, like some actors, “on.” She has the slightly Midwestern air of a woman who is politely clocking everything but holding back her judgments until among friends. When the waiter asked us if we would like a five-ounce or eight-ounce pour of red wine, Metcalf emphatically selected the larger. Then she barely sipped it. Image Laurie Metcalf with fellow Steppenwolf Theater Company members in 1978. Back row (from left): John Malkovich, Gary Sinise, Metcalf, Joan Allen, Gregg Winters and Alan Wilder. Front row (from left): Moira Harris, H.E. Baccus and Jeff Perry. Credit Photograph by Lisa Howe-Ebright She was both exhausted and full of ideas. “No matter how many times you’ve done it, the early stages of getting a show up on its feet is very hit and miss,” she said. “There seem to be thousands of options on every page to discover. All of a sudden, you find yourself like: I’m sitting in the same spot for about 10 pages, and I know that I would be bored looking at this. So now what do I do? I have to challenge myself to figure it out. Try it, try it, try it. Keep trying different things. It’s a big puzzle.” When I asked her when she last tried something that completely failed, she answered immediately: “Today, two hours ago.” Metcalf was still getting a handle on B. “I’m starting to see the possibilities of being a caretaker who cares and a caretaker who doesn’t care and that they can exist in the same person,” she explained. “When can I show when she doesn’t care?” She reached into her bag for the play, which was dog-eared and highlighted, and began to flip through it. “O.K.,” she said, “there’s a line in here where I say, ‘They want to take it off, her arm.’ The other character says, ‘What?’ It’s a clue, maybe, as to how my character could be super-perverse. If I wanted to go down that road, how do I play it with the wink so the audience knows that I’m trying to affect that other actor in a certain way?” And then Metcalf said the line in character, breaking into it as easily and instinctually as she might tuck the hair behind her ear. “The arm. They want to take the arm off.” Watching Metcalf do this, so effortlessly twist a line, made me think not so much about how acting is magic but how magic takes practice. The best tricks are built upon thousands of hours of training, rehearsal and preparation. In this way, acting is not unlike sports. Metcalf was described to me as an athlete more times than I can count, and watching her riff on that line was like watching someone hit a jump shot without even trying, on pure muscle memory, where the muscle Metcalf is flexing is her encyclopedic grasp of human behavior. Even Metcalf’s hobbies lend themselves to her work. She took her one sip of wine and launched into them. She does the crossword puzzle every morning and always has a jigsaw puzzle going at home. She knits, she crochets and, “in an obsessive craze,” she taught herself how to spin wool. “You have to learn it in your hands, and then once you do, you don’t have to think about it anymore,” she says. “It keeps my hands busy, which keeps my brain busy, and I can just sit and run lines or obsess about school lunches or whatever loop I find myself in.” One story I heard about Metcalf that stuck with me involved her performance in an Off Broadway production of Sam Shepard’s “A Lie of the Mind” in 2010. Metcalf asked Shepard why her character said so little when her husband would blather on and on. Shepard said something like, “Well, she’s not as smart as you, Laurie.” The next day, Metcalf took a pile of laundry with her onstage. When the actor who played her husband launched into one of his speeches, she started folding the clothes, eventually taking a pair of socks and stuffing them into her mouth. The audience burst into applause. Ethan Hawke, who directed the play and told me this story, said: “They completely understood everything she was thinking. And she elevated the play to a new level, because she knew that woman was as smart as her.” This is the quintessential Metcalf anecdote, an example of her expending her intelligence, work ethic and creativity to make deeper sense of this woman and the play, giving each a more comprehensive dignity. Sharr White, who wrote the 2011 play “The Other Place,” in which Metcalf starred as a scientist in a health crisis, described working with her as “the process of articulating through every moment and building it technically from the ground up, so it can start resonating emotionally. That’s what she does, builds it brick by brick by brick until it’s this solid, imposing performance.” She lays those bricks just so, until those bricks levitate. “You pour yourself into your work, you invest yourself 150 percent, and when you do,” Metcalf says, “you sleep well at night.” Willa Paskin is the television critic at Slate. Her last article for the magazine was about the lasting relevance of “Anne of Green Gables.”  Sign up for our newsletter to get the best of The New York Times Magazine delivered to your inbox every week. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page 43 of the Sunday Magazine with the headline: Laurie Metcalf Was Hiding in  Plain Sight . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              