   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Arts Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Your Week in Culture: Cardi B’s New Year’s Eve, ‘9-1-1,’ Louise Bourgeois Image Cardi B will perform on New Year’s Eve at the Knockdown Center in Queens. Credit Scott Roth/Invision, via Associated Press By  The New York Times Dec. 29, 2017 New TV shows, museum openings, film releases and concerts — it’s a lot to keep track of. Let us help. For the week of Dec. 31, seven events in New York and elsewhere not to be missed: Pop Music: Cardi B’s New Year’s Eve Dec. 31; knockdown.center . No native of the five boroughs did more to define the sound of 2017 than Cardi B , who topped the pop charts and lifted the spirits of a weary nation with her invigorating single “Bodak Yellow.” That anthem will surely ring out at many New Year’s parties on Sunday night, but only one of them will feature a performance from the Bronx-born rapper herself: She is headlining the night’s festivities at the Knockdown Center, a former glass factory in Maspeth, Queens. Cardi B’s recent live performances have been short, to the point and very fun. At this show, she’ll be joined by an eclectic lineup of forward-thinkers, including the D.J. Venus X, who co-founded this decade’s influential dance party GHE20G0TH1K , and the risqué visual artist Shelby Sells. This is not a show for those expecting to close out the year with a sentimental rendition of “Auld Lang Syne,” but a refreshing toast to the future — complimentary champagne included. SIMON VOZICK-LEVINSON 9-1-1 (FOX) "The First Response" Trailer HD - Peter Krause, Connie Britton, Angela Bassett series Credit Video by TV Promos TV: ‘9-1-1’ on Fox Jan. 3; fox.com . “What’s your emergency?” a familiar voice (it’s Connie Britton’s) asks before elaborating on the two types of trauma she encounters: the everyday variety, which has left her single at 42 and saddled with caring for a mother with late-stage Alzheimer’s; and the more urgent kind, found at the end of the 911 line she monitors. “9-1-1,” a new procedural from Ryan Murphy and Brad Falchuk premiering Wednesday, Jan. 3, on Fox, follows a group of emergency workers in Los Angeles — starring Ms. Britton as a dispatcher, Angela Bassett as a patrol officer and Peter Krause as a firefighter — whose private demons are often as harrowing as their professional ones. It’s a far cry from its creators’ “American Horror Story,” of which Ms. Bassett and Ms. Britton are veterans, but the initial cases on “9-1-1” are only slightly less macabre, including a baby whimpering from inside the plumbing of an apartment building and a snake lover whose python won’t loosen its grip on her. KATHRYN SHATTUCK Image Fabulous objets d’art from the Wiener Werkstätte are on view at the Neue Galerie in Manhattan. Credit Josef Hoffmann/Neue Galerie New York Art: Last-Chance Exhibits in New York Through Feb. 12; metmuseum.org . Through Jan. 28; moma.org . Through Jan. 29; neuegalerie.org . Through Mar. 28; guggenheim.org . Through Jan. 21; newmuseum.org . Through Jan. 28; luhringaugustine.com . Most of the art world spends the holidays catching its breath, but it’s a great time for dedicated viewers to catch up. Whether it’s a fall blockbuster like Michelangelo at the Met or Louise Bourgeois at Museum of Modern Art, the Neue Galerie’s show of fabulous objets d’art from the Wiener Werkstätte , the Guggenheim’s small but gorgeous “ Josef Albers in Mexico ,” or the New Museum’s of-the-moment “ Trigger: Gender as a Tool and a Weapon ,” the city’s museums are full of soon-to-be last-chance exhibits. But start with Mike Kelley ’s provocative, multichannel, high-school flashback fantasia on view at Luhring Augustine in Bushwick through January. WILL HEINRICH Image Alisa Weilerstein will perform Tchaikovsky’s “Variations on a Rococo Theme” with the New York Philharmonic in January. Credit Chris Lee Classical: Mozart, Tchaikovsky, Haydn Jan. 4, 5, 6, 9; nyphil.org. In its first run of concerts in the new year, the New York Philharmonic takes a turn toward the Classical era. On Jan. 4, the ebullient Jeffrey Kahane, who recently concluded an invigorating tenure as music director of the Los Angeles Chamber Orchestra, returns to the Philharmonic’s podium and keyboard to conduct and play Mozart’s buoyant Piano Concerto No. 17. For Tchaikovsky’s graceful, Mozart-infused “Variations on a Rococo Theme,” Kahane and the orchestra will be joined by the outstanding young cellist Alisa Weilerstein, the recipient of a 2011 MacArthur Foundation grant. Rounding out a musically rewarding if conservative program is Haydn’s burnished Symphony No. 98, written for London audiences not long after the composer learned of Mozart’s death. WILLIAM ROBIN Image The actress known as Micari in “Mugen Noh Othello.” Credit Takuma Uchida Theater: The Public’s Under the Radar Festival Jan. 4-15; undertheradarfestival.com . The New York theater season used to pause after the holidays. Now it takes approximately a single breath, and then the wealth of work keeps coming. Some of the most intriguing of it alights at the Public Theater’s dependably enticing Under the Radar Festival, whose panoply of contemporary performance stokes the appetite for the year ahead. Highlights of the 12-day festival — starting on Thursday, Jan. 4, at the Public, and overflowing to several other spaces in Manhattan and Brooklyn — include the British lip-sync artist Dickie Beau performing in “ Re-Member Me ,” a meditation on Hamlet and the actors who have played him; Nature Theater of Oklahoma examining the American dream with the Slovenian dance company EnKnapGroup in “Pursuit of Happiness”; Toshi Reagon and Bernice Johnson Reagon morphing science fiction into a black-music opera with “ Octavia E. Butler’s Parable of the Sower ”; and the Japanese director Satoshi Miyagi harnessing classical noh drama to retell Shakespeare in “Mugen Noh Othello.” The extensive lineup includes much more, and rewards adventure. LAURA COLLINS-HUGHES Film: Maysaloun Hamoud’s ‘In Between’ Jan. 5. In the first scene of “In Between,” an older woman waxes the legs of a younger one while counseling her on men: Keep your mouth shut and your body smooth, and never let on that you know what you’re doing in bed. But the stars of the Palestinian writer and director Maysaloun Hamoud’s feisty feature debut aren’t heeding that advice. Laila (Mouna Hawa), a criminal lawyer, and Salma (Sana Jammelieh), an aspiring D.J., share an apartment in Tel Aviv, their nights filled with sex, drugs and electronica. Then they open their door to Nour (Shaden Kanboura), a hijab-wearing university student with a holier-than-thou fiancé intent on making her his dutiful wife. But sometimes not even modern lovers — Laila and a worldly filmmaker, Salma and a female medical student — can escape the burden of tradition in a country that doesn’t fully accept them. Nor can a filmmaker: “In Between,” opening Friday, Jan. 5, in New York, before a wider release, earned Ms. Hamoud death threats after a conservative West Bank town banned the movie. KATHRYN SHATTUCK Image Members of Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater performing “Members Don’t Get Weary” this month. Credit Andrea Mohin/The New York Times Dance: Last Chance to See Ailey and Balanchine Through Dec. 31, nycitycenter.org ;  nycballet.com . On New Year’s Eve, the curtain will fall on two enthralling dances, one new and one old. Jamar Roberts’s “Members Don’t Get Weary,” a season premiere for Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater, didn’t feel so much like a dance — although it was a fine one, with nuance and power — as it did a profound message to the world. Its music was John Coltrane’s “Dear Lord” and “Olé.” A cherished veteran of Ailey, Mr. Roberts delivered, in his first work for the main company, a transcendent look at how the blues play into our culture. It’s a rarity. It will last. And as for a dance that has already endured through the decades? “ George Balanchine’s The Nutcracker ,” a radiant melding of theatrical heart and choreographic ingenuity. Soon, the run of this holiday classic will come to its timely end, but it’s not gone yet. For some reason, it’s better to see it after Christmas. It feels all the more like a secret from childhood. GIA KOURLAS Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              