   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Briefing Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Asia and Australia Edition Michael Flynn, Tamil Nadu, Kim Jong-un: Your Morning Briefing By  Charles McDermid Feb. 14, 2017 Good morning. Here’s what you need to know: Image Credit Ahn Young-Joon/Associated Press • The police in Malaysia are searching for two women in the assassination of the half brother of the North Korean leader Kim Jong-un, in an attack at a Kuala Lumpur airport. The half brother, Kim Jong-nam, 45, lived in semi-exile and was sometimes seen in Macau. South Korea’s governing party called the episode a “naked example of Kim Jong-un’s reign of terror.” _____ Image Credit Kevin D. Liles for The New York Times •  The resignation of Michael T. Flynn as President Trump’s national security adviser has added to the impression that the White House is in chaos, and that the U.S. security apparatus is, as a top Republican said, “dysfunctional.” If Mr. Flynn was not entirely honest with the F.B.I. about his conversations with a Russian ambassador, it could expose him to a felony charge. Mr. Trump had known for weeks, his spokesman said, that Mr. Flynn had misled the vice president about the conversations. The departure dampened hopes of improving Russian-American relations , just as news broke that Moscow had secretly deployed a new cruise missile in what U.S. officials said was a violation of a landmark arms control treaty. _____ Image Credit Gali Tibbon/Agence France-Presse — Getty Images • Other international pressures on the U.S. are building, as well. China is urging the U.S. to enter talks with North Korea to end its nuclear weapons program — even after North Korea tested an intermediate-range missile in a significant stride — apparently sensing that Mr. Trump’s desire to make deals could break 16 years of deadlock. And as Mr. Trump and Israel’s prime minister, Benjamin Netanyahu , meet today, a likely topic will be their hopes for an “outside-in” approach to the Palestinian conflict: collaborating with Arab countries worried about Iran, and using those relationships to press Palestinians in talks on a two-state solution. Today’s episode of The Daily podcast asks: Could that plan actually work? Listen here if you’re on a computer, here if you have an iOS device or here for an Android device. _____ Image Credit Kin Cheung/Associated Press •  Seven Hong Kong police officers were convicted of assault for beating a protester during pro-democracy demonstrations that swept the city in 2014. The beating, caught by a television crew, outraged the public. Separately, in the widening case of a missing Hong Kong billionaire, Beijing appears to be enforcing one of its most far-reaching crackdowns on a private Chinese conglomerate. Dozens of people employed by Xiao Jianhua have been stopped from leaving the mainland. _____ Image Credit ROBERTO SCHMIDT/Agence France-Presse — Getty Images • India’s air pollution is surpassing China’s as the deadliest in the world . A new study found that smog in India is causing about 1.1 million premature deaths a year, a number on the rise, while China’s rate has stabilized. Business Image Credit Toru Hanai/Reuters • Toshiba announced that its chairman, Shigenori Shiga, would resign amid losses from a disastrous bet on American nuclear energy. • Janet L. Yellen , the Federal Reserve chief, told a Senate committee that U.S. job growth remained good, and increases in the key interest rate were still likely. • Credit Suisse will cut 5,500 jobs by the end of this year . •  Some birthday:  Stephen Schwarzman of the Blackstone Group threw himself a multimillion-dollar bash for his 70th, but, in a sign of changing times, it passed with little of the vilification stirred by the lavish party for his 60th. • Playboy, the men’s magazine, is bringing nudity back to its pages after a year without it. • U.S. markets  were higher . Here’s a snapshot of global markets . In the News Image Credit Beawiharta/Reuters • Indonesia’s capital, Jakarta, is going to the polls to elect a governor, a vote that will be as much a referendum on growing conservatism in the metropolis of 30 million people as a race between the Christian, ethnic Chinese incumbent and his two Muslim opponents. [ Jakarta Globe ] • The prosecutor in South Korea’s corruption scandal will try again to arrest Lee Jae-yong, the de facto leader of Samsung, on bribery charges. A court hears the case tomorrow. [ The New York Times ] • India’s Supreme Court convicted Sasikala Natarajan, the head of the ruling party in Tamil Nadu state, of corruption, ending her bid to follow the revered politician known as Amma as the state’s chief minister. [ BBC ] • Malaysia, Singapore and Australia have seen a rise in internet love scammers who pledge to visit their digital darling in person — and then run into obstacles only money can solve. [ Channel NewsAsia ] • Australian police were warned that the Latin American street gang known as MS-13 is working with local biker gangs to tap into the country’s booming drug trade. [ News.com.au ] • In Japan, a yakuza crime boss was sent to prison after years of delays caused by a medical condition that police now suspect was faked. [ The Asahi Shimbun ] • China’s central government sent a team of medical experts to investigate a top provincial public hospital where five patients were infected with H.I.V. last month. [ Caixin ] • Herds of the endangered saiga antelope in Mongolia are being hit with a devastating disease, two years after an enormous die-off in Kazakhstan. [ The New York Times ] • In New Zealand, excavators and dump trucks moved over 200 decomposing carcasses of pilot whales. [ The New York Times ] • The threat of catastrophic flooding from the damaged Oroville Dam this week is a warning sign for California, where a network of dams and waterways is suffering from age and stress. [ The New York Times ] Smarter Living Image Credit Don Ipock for The New York Times • Try this novel approach to your morning coffee: For a tastier mug, try freezing your beans . • After a woman swipes right on a man with his own bakery, she falls for both him and his bread . •  Recipe of the day: Move on from weeknight chicken and try stuffed and seared duck breasts . Noteworthy Image Credit Lauryn Ishak for The New York Times • South Korea is a skiing afterthought no more. The 2018 Winter Olympics is a major source of national pride and a coming-out party for the country as a winter sports wonderland. • And check out the glamorous life of a show dog. Our latest 360 video takes you backstage at the 141st annual Westminster Kennel Club Dog Show in New York City. Back Story Image Credit Associated Press As unlikely as it may sound today, Canada’s Maple Leaf flag was once the center of a dispute so bitter that historians named it: the Great Flag Debate . When the Maple Leaf, or l’Unifolié (French for “the One-Leafed”), was officially adopted on this day in 1965, it was after decades of disagreement that had divided the public, mostly along lines of British and French colonial roots. The country had flown a flag featuring the Union Jack, under which Canadian troops fought in two world wars. Prime Minister Lester B. Pearson, though, wanted a banner that would unify Canadians, not just represent those with British ties. And a 1958 poll showed that more than 80 percent of the population wanted a flag entirely different from any other country’s. Tree references show up in other flags. Think of Lebanon’s cedar tree, or the popular use of the olive branch, as in the United Nations’ logo. Canada’s maple leaf was carefully designed. Its 11 points were decided on after a wind tunnel test to see how the leaf would look flapping in the breeze . _____ Your Morning Briefing is published weekday mornings. What would you like to see here? Contact us at asiabriefing@nytimes.com . Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              