   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Health Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Zika Can Be Transmitted by Female Mosquito to Her Eggs, Study Says Image Mosquito larvae being inspected in Miami Beach last Wednesday. Credit Scott McIntyre for The New York Times By  Donald G. McNeil Jr. Aug. 29, 2016 The Zika virus can be transmitted by a female mosquito to her eggs, eventually infecting her adult daughters, researchers reported on Monday. But mother-daughter transmission happens so rarely among mosquitoes that it is probably not an important factor in the global Zika epidemic, according to the lead author of the study, published in The American Journal of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene. Instead, this form of transmission is probably a survival mechanism, allowing the Zika virus to persist through winters and dry spells when adult mosquitoes die off, said the author, Dr. Robert B. Tesh , a pathologist at the University of Texas Medical Branch in Galveston. The study was done in mosquitoes bred in the U.T.M.B. insectary, “so we need to confirm whether this occurs in nature, too,” Dr. Tesh said. Answering that question will mean collecting eggs and larvae in the wild from the mosquitoes, Aedes aegypti, that carry the infection. “Aedes aegypti are hard to find,” Dr. Tesh said. “They aren’t as numerous as other mosquitoes.” Zika’s relatives in the flavivirus family — including yellow fever, dengue, West Nile, Japanese encephalitis and St. Louis encephalitis — all have the ability to skip down a generation in various mosquito species. But so-called filial infection is usually rare. In the case of Zika, only one daughter Aedes aegypti mosquito out of 300 inherits the virus from an infected mother, Dr. Tesh’s team estimated. The team also tested Aedes albopictus, a related species that is more widespread through the United States. The researchers found that no progeny inherited the virus from an infected mother. By contrast, Dr. Tesh said, filial infection is important for the La Crosse virus, which causes serious brain disease or death in about 72 Americans each year, most of them children. That virus is transmitted to humans by Aedes triseriatus, a forest mosquito that picks it up from chipmunks. La Crosse virus passes down easily in mosquito eggs; about 70 percent of mosquito females maturing from those eggs inherit the virus, Dr. Tesh said. Related Coverage New York City Wages War on the Zika Virus Aug. 21, 2016 Image New Zika Cases Investigated in Florida Aug. 23, 2016 Image A Guide to Help Pregnant Women Reduce Their Zika Risk Aug. 26, 2016 Image All Donated Blood in U.S. Should Be Tested for Zika, F.D.A. Says Aug. 26, 2016 Image Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              