   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Weddings Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Joelle Silverman, Vladyslav Golyk Image Credit Howard Bernstein Aug. 6, 2017 Joelle Marisa Silverman and Vladyslav Alexander Golyk are to be married Aug. 6 at the Brooklyn Botanic Garden. Rabbi Paula Mack Drill is to officiate. In May, the bride, 24, received a master’s degree in corporate communications from N.Y.U. She graduated from Boston University. She is the daughter of Holly A. Rosenthal of New York and Barry E. Silverman of Tappan, N.Y. The bride's father is a private banking credit consultant in New York. Her mother developed and marketed MidNite Sleep Remedy, which is now owned by Mylan. The bride’s stepfather, Dr. Howard H. Bernstein, who is retired, was an associate professor at the Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai Medical Center and a director of obstetric anesthesia. The groom, 28, is a manager with McKinsey & Company, a management consulting firm in New York. He graduated with highest honors from V. N. Karazin Kharkiv National University in Kharkiv, Ukraine, from which he also received a master’s degree in theoretical and mathematical physics. He received a Ph.D. in that subject from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. He is a son of Liliya B. Golyk and Dr. Oleksandr Golyk of Kharkiv. The groom's father is a professor and chief senior researcher at the Materials Institute, Tubitak Marmara Research Center in Gebze, Turkey. The couple met at a party in Boston in April 2012. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page ST 13 of the New York edition with the headline: Joelle Silverman,  Vladyslav Golyk . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              