   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Corrections Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Corrections: August 28, 2014 Aug. 28, 2014 FRONT PAGE An article on Sunday about events immediately after the shooting of Michael Brown, the unarmed teenager killed by a police officer in Ferguson, Mo., misstated the given name and the surname of Mr. Brown’s uncle, who was shown in a video walking up to the police tape and staring at Mr. Brown’s body. He is Bernard Ewing, not Brendan Ewings. INTERNATIONAL An article last Thursday about the harsh environment for reporters, both abroad and in the United States, which was underscored by the murder of the freelance journalist James Foley, misstated the year that the civil war in Libya began. It was early 2011, not 2010. (Mr. Foley was taken hostage while covering that conflict.) • An article on Friday about the closing of McDonald’s restaurants in Moscow by the Russian government as tensions with the West over the crisis in Ukraine escalate misstated the number of McDonald’s in Russia. There are 435, not 437. • An article on Tuesday about the popularity of an instant-messaging app called Hike, which allows young Indians to conceal aspects of their social lives from their families, misidentified the Indian state in which Rohtak, a city where a graduate student who uses Hike lives, is situated. It is in Haryana, not Punjab. NEW YORK A picture caption on Monday with an article about the Rev. Al Sharpton’s expanded profile, especially in race relations, misspelled, in some editions, the surname of a former governor of New York who attended a march led by Mr. Sharpton last week protesting the death of Eric Garner in police custody. The former governor is David A. Paterson, not Patterson. • A picture caption on Aug. 19 with an article about heightened fear among livery cabdrivers after two were killed in recent weeks carried an incorrect date. The picture, of livery cabs waiting for fares under the No. 1 train line, was taken on June 10, 2013 — not the day before the article was published. BUSINESS DAY An article on Tuesday about Burger King’s merger ambitions and its growth strategy, using information from a company representative, misstated the age of the chain’s chief executive, Daniel Schwartz. He is 34, not 33. SPORTS A news analysis article last Thursday about the effect of the female pitcher Mo’ne Davis’s success in the Little League World Series quoted incorrectly, in some editions, from comments that James B. Peterson, director of the department of Africana studies at Lehigh University, made about Davis to The Philadelphia Inquirer. He said, “The emergence of Mo’ne is a great relief,” not “The emergence of Mo’ne has been a relief.” • An article last Thursday about Rory McIlroy’s recent string of successes on the PGA Tour referred incorrectly to Adam Scott’s world ranking since last year’s Barclays tournament. This year, Scott rose to No. 1 from No. 2 in mid-May and spent 11 weeks as the top-ranked player before returning to No. 2, his current ranking. After winning the Barclays last year, he did not move to “No. 2 in the rankings, where he has stayed.” WEEKEND An art review on Friday about “Men in Armor,” an exhibition at the Frick Collection that includes a 1575 portrait by El Greco that synthesizes the brushwork of Titian, misstated the year of Titian’s death. It was 1576, not 1575. SCIENCE TIMES An article on Tuesday about a Liberian doctor with Ebola who died after being given ZMapp, an experimental drug, misstated the efficacy against Ebola of the drug called favipiravir or Avigan. It has been shown to be effective in mice; it is not the case that it has not worked against Ebola at all.  The Times welcomes comments and suggestions, or complaints about errors that warrant correction. Messages on news coverage can be e-mailed to nytnews@nytimes.com or left toll-free at 1-888-NYT-NEWS (1-888-698-6397). Comments on editorials may be e-mailed to letters@nytimes.com or faxed to (212) 556-3622. Readers dissatisfied with a response or concerned about the paper’s journalistic integrity may reach the public editor at public@nytimes.com or (212) 556-7652. For newspaper delivery questions: 1-800-NYTIMES (1-800-698-4637) or e-mail customercare@nytimes.com . Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              