   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Science Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Science Bookshelf Best Selling Science Books By  The New York Times April 14, 2014 1 DAVID AND GOLIATH by Malcolm Gladwell. Little Brown. How disadvantages can work in our favor, from the author of “The Tipping Point” and “Outliers.” (Last month’s ranking: 1.) 2 THE FUTURE OF THE MIND by Michio Kaku. Doubleday. A theoretical physicist examines research at the intersection of neuroscience and physics that points to the day when science has a complete map of the brain, making telepathy, mind-controlled robots and uploading memories possible. (7) 3 QUIET  by Susan Cain. Crown. Introverts — one-third of the population — are undervalued in American society. (2) 4 THINKING, FAST AND SLOW by Daniel Kahneman. Farrar, Straus & Giroux. The winner of a Nobel in economic science discusses how we make choices in business and personal life and when we can and cannot trust our intuitions. (5) 5 A SHORT GUIDE TO A LONG LIFE by David B. Agus with Kristin Loberg. Simon & Schuster. A doctor recommends daily habits for healthy living. (3) 6 THE POWER OF HABIT by Charles Duhigg. Random House. A New York Times reporter’s account of the science behind forming habits, and breaking them. (6) 7 THE SIXTH EXTINCTION by Elizabeth Kolbert. Holt. The New Yorker writer examines the role of human influences in the planet’s current spasm of plant and animal loss. (4) 8 THE IMMORTAL LIFE OF HENRIETTA LACKS by Rebecca Skloot. Crown. The story of an African-American woman whose cancerous cells were extensively cultured without her permission in 1951. (10) 9 THE GIRLS OF ATOMIC CITY by Denise Kiernan. Simon & Schuster. Thousands of women took well-paid jobs in Oak Ridge, Tenn., during World War II, not knowing that the government project where they worked was enriching uranium for the first atomic bomb. 10 THE RISE OF SUPERMAN by Steven Kotler. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt. Decoding the science of human athletic performance, both mainstream and extreme. 11 THE SECOND MACHINE AGE by Erik Brynjolfsson and Andrew McAfee. Norton. How digital technologies will change our lives and the economy, and what we can do to prepare ourselves. (9) 12 OPERATION PAPERCLIP by Annie Jacobsen. Little, Brown. The secret intelligence program that brought Nazi scientists to America. (13) 13 THE NEW DIGITAL AGE by Eric Schmidt and Jared Cohen. Knopf/Vintage. The promise and peril of the continuing information and technology revolution for people, nations and business. 14 FAR FROM THE TREE by Andrew Solomon. Scribner. The difficulties and triumphs of families dealing with exceptional children. 15 BRAINSTORM by Daniel J. Siegel. Tarcher/Penguin. Understanding the adolescent mind. (11) 16 THE REASON I JUMP by Naoki Higashida. Random House. A 13-year-old boy with autism answers questions. (12) 17 SALT SUGAR FAT by Michael Moss. Random House. A New York Times reporter reveals how food companies rely on scientific research to encourage us to consume more of their products. (18) 18 INSIDE OF A DOG by Alexandra Horowitz. Scribner. What the world is like from a dog’s point of view. (20) 19 IT’S COMPLICATED by Danah Boyd. Yale University Press. Emerging social media and the impact on adolescent development. (16) 20 THE GENIUS OF DOGS by Brian Hare and Vanessa Woods. Penguin. Cognitive science provides insights to the intelligence and survival of canines. (17) The titles ranked here are selected by the science editors from all adult nonfiction books reported to The New York Times for the month. These titles are fundamentally based on the sciences; those for which science is more tangential or peripheral are generally excluded. Rankings reflect combined print and e-book sales for March 2014. An asterisk (*) indicates that a book’s sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above. A dagger (†) indicates that some bookstores report receiving bulk orders. More information on rankings and methodology: nytimes.com/science.  A version of this article appears in print on , on Page D 6 of the New York edition . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Related Coverage Science Bookshelf: Methodology April 15, 2013 Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              