   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Weddings Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Hilary Huber, Benjamin Walker Image Credit Divine Light Photography Oct. 15, 2017 Hilary Rose Huber and Benjamin Robert Walker were married Oct. 13 at the Daniel Patrick Moynihan United States Court House in New York. Vernon S. Broderick, a judge of the Federal District Court for the Southern District of New York, officiated. On Oct. 14, Roy B. Dalton Jr., a judge of the Federal District Court for the Middle District of Florida in Orlando, for whom the bride previously served as a law clerk, led a ceremony at the Metropolitan Club in New York. The couple are both lawyers. They met in 2014 while working in the litigation group of the New York law firm Sullivan & Cromwell. She was an associate, he is a partner. Mrs. Walker, 31, now works in the Financial Crimes Compliance division of Standard Chartered Bank in New York. She graduated from Emory and received a law degree, magna cum laude, from the University of Florida. She is the daughter of Carolyn E. Huber and Dr. Laurence T. Huber, both of Pinecrest, Fla. Her father, a dentist, owns Kendall Dental Associates in Miami. Her mother retired as a kindergarten teacher at Vineland Elementary School in Miami. Mr. Walker, 38, graduated from the University of Kansas, from which he also received a law degree. He is a son of Kathryn A. Walker of Hutchinson, Kan., and Kenneth N. Walker of Cortez, Colo. The groom's mother is a nurse manager at the Wesley Medical Center in Wichita, Kan. His father, now retired, sold event packages for the Y.M.C.A. of the Rockies in Estes Park, Colo. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page ST 17 of the New York edition with the headline: Hilary Huber  Benjamin Walker . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              