   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Opinion Supported by Abortion Endures as a Political Tripwire By  Thomas B. Edsall April 15, 2014 Why is there such a difference in the durability of two foundational issues of American conservatism: gay marriage and abortion? Same-sex marriage burst onto the political scene in the early 1990s, lasted through the mid-2000s, and is now quietly fading. Abortion, as a political call to arms, has been around twice as long and shows no signs of disappearing. Opposition to same-sex marriage became a centerpiece of the conservative movement in the early 1990s, and resulted in the 1996 passage — with Bill Clinton’s support — of the Defense of Marriage Act. DOMA declared that “the word ‘marriage’ means only a legal union between one man and one woman as husband and wife, and the word ‘spouse’ refers only to a person of the opposite sex who is a husband or a wife.” In 2004, when George W. Bush deployed it to boost turnout during the presidential election, same-sex marriage reached its maximum efficacy as a tool to mobilize voters. That year, voters in 11 states — including the key battleground state of Ohio — approved , by double-digit margins, state constitutional bans on gay marriage. Eight years later, opposition to gay marriage had become an Election Day loser. In his 2012 re-election campaign, Obama declared his support for same-sex marriage, and surveys suggest that his stand contributed to his Election Day victory. Exit polls conducted for the networks showed that voters that year favored gay marriage by a 49-46 margin, and that those who backed such unions voted for Obama by 73-25. In other words, gay marriage had roughly a 20-year half-life. Compare that with abortion. Medically induced termination of pregnancy became a major source of political contention on Jan. 22, 1973, the day the Supreme Court issued its 7-2 decision in Roe v Wade . In Roe, the court ruled that restrictions on abortion during the first trimester of pregnancy “violate the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment, which protects against state action the right to privacy, including a woman’s qualified right to terminate her pregnancy.” Today, 41 years later, the abortion battle continues unabated. The pro-abortion rights Guttmacher Institute tracks state laws restricting the procedure. The organization found that between 2011 and 2013, 205 such laws — ranging from tough regulation of abortion clinics to bans on private insurance coverage of abortion costs — have been enacted at the state level, more than the 189 laws passed in the prior 10 years. What is it about abortion that gives it such political staying power? One obvious answer it is that for opponents it is an issue of life and death. For pro-choice women, it is a question of personal autonomy and bodily integrity. Take a look at the history of the fight for women’s rights, as argued by the feminist legal scholar Catharine MacKinnon . In her 1989 book, “Toward a Feminist Theory of the State,” MacKinnon wrote , “male dominance is perhaps the most pervasive and tenacious system of power in history.” The goal of the feminist project, she argued six years earlier, “is to uncover and claim as valid the experience of women, the major content of which is the devalidation of women’s experience.” Lisa Tuttle, in the “Encyclopedia of Feminism,” described reproductive freedom “as a basic human right, it includes the right to abortion and birth control, but implies much more. To be realized, reproductive freedom must include not only woman’s right to choose childbirth, abortion, sterilization or birth control, but also her right to make those choices freely, without pressure from individual men, doctors, governmental or religious authorities. It is a key issue for women, since without it the other freedoms we appear to have, such as the right to education, jobs and equal pay, may prove illusory.” These thoughts are by no means the opinions of women only. In an effort to explore the politics of abortion rights I contacted a disparate group of contemporary experts. While none of these theorists could be categorized as politically correct – if anything, some have been accused of just the opposite — all see the anti-abortion movement as driven in part by the determined effort to control the reproductive rights of women. Steven Pinker, a professor of psychology at Harvard, is no stranger to criticism from feminists . In his book “ The Blank Slate : The Modern Denial of Human Nature,” Pinker wrote: “Feminism as a movement for political and social equity is important, but feminism as an academic clique committed to eccentric doctrines about human nature is not. Eliminating discrimination against women is important, but believing that women and men are born with indistinguishable minds is not. Freedom of choice is important, but ensuring that women make up exactly 50 percent of all professions is not. And eliminating sexual assaults is important, but advancing the theory that rapists are doing their part in a vast male conspiracy is not.” When I asked Pinker in an email about abortion, however, his response was very much in line with the thinking of feminist theorists. Abortion may “touch on a characteristic male obsession: controlling the sexuality of women,” he said, noting that in most traditional societies “a woman’s male relatives, and then her husband, will try to control her sexuality in a variety of ways: veils, wigs, clothing, chaperones, segregation by sex, chastity belts, engagement rings, terms of address (‘Mrs. John Smith’), ceremonies (as when a father gives away the bride to her husband), and laws that make a woman the property of her husband.” These efforts, Pinker said, are driven, in part, by fears of “ paternity uncertainty” : “The ultimate evolutionary reason is presumably to guarantee paternity, since a cuckolded man is in the worst imaginable evolutionary scenario: investing in the child, and hence the genes, of a rival man.” Along similar lines, John Hibbing, a political scientist at the University of Nebraska, Lincoln, who specializes in the study of how “biological variations mitigate the way in which individuals respond to politically relevant environmental occurrences,” argues that reproduction is both a core political issue and a core evolutionary issue. Hibbing’s comment focused on themes consistent with Pinker’s: “Those most concerned with security and tradition tend to be politically conservative and those most open to new lifestyles and who are less focused on security will tend toward the political left. Issues of reproduction are likely to be at the core of the conflict between tradition and new lifestyles since these issues are about as basic as they come. Fundamentalism in some parts of the world is often driven by the desire of males to control reproductive opportunities. These issues form the evolutionary core.” From 1995 to 2010, the percentage of women 15-44 whose first union was a marriage fell from 39 to 23 percent, while the percentage of women whose first union was a (non-marital) cohabitation shot up from 34 to 48 percent, according to the National Survey of Family Growth at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. The C.D.C. also found that in a very brief period, between 2002 and 2010, the percentage of women 15 to 44 whose first child was born outside of marriage grew from 37.7 percent to 45.5 percent. These trends in behavior have coincided with major attitudinal shifts in the United States. The General Social Survey has, for example, asked respondents almost every year from 1972 to 2006 this question: “There’s been a lot of discussion about the way morals and attitudes about sex are changing in this country. If a man and woman have sex relations before marriage, do you think it is always wrong, almost always wrong, wrong only sometimes, or not wrong at all?” In 1972, 72.3 percent of respondents said premarital relations were wrong; “always wrong,” according to 35.7 percent; “almost always wrong,” according to 11.4 percent; and “sometimes wrong,” according to 25.2 percent. Just over a quarter of respondents, 27.7 percent, said such relations were “not wrong at all.” By 2006, 34 years later, the percentage saying premarital relations are “not wrong at all” had grown to 45.7 percent, while “always wrong” had fallen 10 points to 25.6 percent; “almost always wrong” had fallen to 8.9 percent, and “sometimes wrong” had dropped to 19.8 percent. On the larger issue of women’s relationship to family, the G.S.S. first asked in 1977 whether respondents agreed or disagreed with the statement: “It is more important for a wife to help her husband’s career than to have one herself.” In 1977, 57 percent agreed, of whom 13.8 percent “strongly” agreed. Disagreeing were 43 percent of respondents — 6.7 percent strongly. By 1998, when G.S.S. asked this question, the numbers had flipped. Just 18.8 percent of those surveyed agreed, a tiny 2.6 percent strongly. A decisive majority, 81.3 percent disagreed, of whom 25.1 percent disagreed strongly. Despite these trends and survey findings, Republican-controlled statehouses continue to press for new restrictions on abortion. Nationally, the Republican Party with its strong anti-abortion contingent could be headed toward a major victory this coming November. Virtually all political professionals believe the House will remain firmly in Republican hands. Most election analysts either predict the likelihood of a Republican take-over of the Senate this year or give that outcome even odds . In terms of the 2016 presidential election, according to many analysts, a Republican take-over of the White House is entirely possible, which could give the party complete control of the federal government. In that event, the drive to restrict abortion — perhaps, initially, incrementally — may well re-emerge. This would be the case not only in the legislative and executive branches, but also in the Supreme Court, especially if one of the four reliably liberal justices decides to retire, and a Republican president is in a position to choose a replacement. Surprisingly, perhaps, there are still a sizeable number of Americans who want to put the women’s rights genie back in the bottle . With all of their demographic problems, the question is, how much can Republicans afford to fool around with this particular kind of political dynamite? Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              