   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Opinion Supported by One Thing Donald Trump Would Like Is Freedom From the Press By  Thomas B. Edsall March 15, 2018 Image President Trump speaking to the news media outside the White House on Tuesday. Credit Tom Brenner/The New York Times More than any president in living memory, Donald Trump has conducted a dogged, remorseless assault on the press . He portrays the news media not only as a dedicated adversary of his administration but of the entire body politic. These attacks have forced the media where it does not want to be, at the center of the political debate. Trump’s purpose is clear. He seeks to weaken an institution that serves to constrain the abusive exercise of executive authority. He has initiated a gladiatorial contest pitting the principle of freedom of the press against a principle of his own invention: freedom from the press. Trump has his media favorites, Fox News and other organizations that serve as approved public relations outlets, versus the “ fake news ,” meaning virtually everything else. Politicians have frequently questioned the neutrality and objectivity of specific journalists, their stories and their publications, but Trump has raised the stakes to a new level. He has described news organizations as “the enemy of the American people.” He has routinely called reporters “scum,” “slime,” “dishonest” and “disgusting.” In November, Trump proposed a contest to determine which network — Fox excluded — “is the most dishonest, corrupt and/or distorted in its political coverage of your favorite President (me). They are all bad. Winner to receive the FAKE NEWS TROPHY!” The news media “have been incorporated into the political style of the governing party as fixed hate objects,” Jay Rosen , a professor of journalism at N.Y.U., wrote in an email to me. Rosen observed that the history of right-wing attacks on the media extends back through Agnew’s speeches for Nixon to Goldwater’s campaign in 1964 and winds forward through William Rusher , talk radio , and of course Fox News , which founded a business model on liberal bias. There is an underlying strategy to Trump’s critique of the media. Rosen continued: Trump is not just attacking the press but the conditions that make it possible for news reports to serve as any kind of check on power. Trump is the apotheosis of this history and its accelerant. He has advanced the proposition dramatically. From undue influence (Agnew’s claim) to something closer to treason (enemy of the people.) Instead of criticizing ‘the media’ for unfair treatment, he whips up hatred for it. Some of his most demagogic performances have been exactly that. Nixon seethed about the press in private. Trump seethes in public, a very different act. Trump has some built-in advantages in his war on the media. Confidence in the media was in decline long before Trump entered politics — a slide that reflected the rise in political polarization . Gallup reported in September 2017 that 37 percent of the public had a “great deal” or “fair amount” of confidence in the mass media, down from 53 percent in 1997. And Trump’s critique of the media reaches a highly receptive audience. An April 2017 Gallup survey found that by a margin of more than 2 to 1, the public said that the press favored one party over the other. Of those who said the media is partisan, 64 percent said that the media favors Democrats, and 22 percent said Republicans. The media, on the other hand, enters the fray with significant disadvantages. In a 2017 paper, “ Enemy Construction and the Press ,” RonNell Andersen Jones and Lisa Grow Sun, law professors at the University of Utah and Brigham Young University, argue that Trump’s goal is fundamentally malign: The Trump administration, with a rhetoric that began during the campaign and burgeoned in the earliest days of Donald Trump’s presidency, has engaged in enemy construction of the press, and the risks that accompany that categorization are grave. Insofar as Trump succeeds in “undercutting the watchdog, educator, and proxy functions of the press,” they write, it leaves the administration more capable of delegitimizing other institutions and constructing other enemies — including the judiciary, the intelligence community, immigrants, and members of certain races or religions. Image President Richard Nixon fielding questions from a room full of reporters during his first press conference after taking office in 1969. Credit Wally McNamee/Corbis,via Getty Images Jones and Sun contend that in many respects, Trump is reminiscent of Richard M. Nixon: Nixon, like Trump, accused the media of being out to get him and predicted that the press would mischaracterize his public support or the reception he received. He believed the liberal media to be biased against him personally, maintaining that he had “entered the presidency with less support from the major publications and TV networks than any president in history” and that “their whole objective in life is to bring us down.” Unlike Trump, however, Nixon (like the country’s founders ) routinely reaffirmed to both the press and the public that he conceived of the press as central to democracy. Indeed, in his first speech to the public regarding the Watergate scandal, Nixon acknowledged that “the system that brought the facts to light and that will bring those guilty to justice” was a system that included “a vigorous free press.” Trump stands out, according to Jones and Sun, in that his administration has passed a threshold not approached by previous administrations in their tensions with the media. Trump is signaling — through his terminology, through his delegitimizing actions, and through his anticipatory undercutting — that the press is literally the enemy, to be distrusted, ignored, and excluded. In response to my email, Jones replied that “war has been declared, whether they (the media) like it or not.” She noted that the instincts of the press motivate it to want to call out the changing norms that it sees around it, and to defend the role of important democratic institutions when they are attacked. But when the press is itself one of those institutions, it finds itself a part of the story in ways that it is unaccustomed to being, and it has to weigh the potential loss of credibility that might come with an aggressive self-defense. I asked Jonathan Ladd , a professor of public policy and government at Georgetown, what strategies he thought the media should adopt to counter negative portrayals by conservatives. “The best way for the press to react to Trump’s undemocratic behavior is to continue trying to do their jobs the best they can,” Ladd wrote. “The press is not perfect, but Trump’s bad behavior doesn’t change what they need to do.” Ladd specifically warned against “reacting to Trump by becoming more crusadingly anti-Trump.” Trump has successfully “put the mainstream media in a difficult position,” according to Geoffrey Stone , a law professor at the University of Chicago: If the media directly address the accusations of fake news, they ironically run the risk of dignifying the accusations. But if they ignore the accusations, they miss the opportunity to prove their professionalism to those who have grown skeptical. In the long term, Stone suggested, we could begin to remedy this problem if we improved civic education and encouraged a stronger defense of the media by politicians, especially Republicans — a prospect about which he is not optimistic. Of the media itself, however, Stone wrote: I don’t know that there’s really much they can do to defend themselves. Those who trust them will continue to trust them. Those who distrust them are unlikely to be brought around by anything they themselves are likely to say. Trump’s disdain for the First Amendment is an integral part of a much longer series of developments in which both parties have demonstrated a willingness to defy democratic norms, although the Republican Party has been in the forefront. In “Asymmetric Constitutional Hardball,” Joseph Fishkin and David E. Pozen , law professors at the University of Texas and Columbia, write: For a quarter of a century, Republican officials have been more willing than Democratic officials to play constitutional hardball — not only or primarily on judicial nominations but across a range of spheres. Democrats have also availed themselves of hardball throughout this period, but not with the same frequency or intensity. Fishkin and Pozen cite the work of Mark Tushnet, a professor at Harvard Law School, to define constitutional hardball as “political claims and practices” that are without much question within the bounds of existing constitutional doctrine and practice but that are nonetheless in some tension with existing pre-constitutional understandings. Constitutional hardball tactics are viewed by the other side as provocative and unfair because they flout the ‘goes without saying’ assumptions that underpin working systems of constitutional government. Such tactics do not generally flout binding legal norms. But that only heightens the sense of foul play insofar as it insulates acts of hardball from judicial review. Republicans on the far right, in particular, Fishkin and Pozen write, have been willing to engage in constitutional hardball because they are drawn to “narratives of debasement and restoration,” which suggest that something has gone fundamentally awry in the republic, on the order of an existential crisis, and that unpatriotic liberals have allowed or caused it to happen. The severity of the liberal threat, in the eyes of these conservatives, justifies extreme steps to restore what they see as a besieged moral order. In an email, Fishkin wrote: As with so many things about President Trump, it strikes me that he didn’t start the fire. He got into office because it was already burning and now he’s pouring on gasoline. In Fishkin’s view, Trump will do all he can to make the conflict between his party and the press “sharper and more intense, in the same way that he depends on and aims to intensify partisan polarization.” Pozen warned in an email: Accusations that the press has a political agenda can, perversely, help create an agenda which is then said to corroborate the accusations. Pozen described Trump’s denunciation of the press as “the culmination of several decades of comparable attacks by media pundits, such as Rush Limbaugh ” and he argues that Trump’s calls to lock up one’s general election opponent, encouraging online hate mobs, lying constantly, attacking the press constantly, contradicting oneself constantly, undermining the very idea of truth are individually and in common potentially profound threats to the integrity and quality of our system of free expression. The question is whether the news media can mount an effective check on the exercise of power when the media itself has become an object of hatred for a large segment of the electorate. Rosen of N.Y.U. notes the cross pressures on the news media: I think our top journalists are correct that if they become the political opposition to Trump, and see themselves that way, they lose. But they have to go to war against a political style in which power gets to write its own story. Rosen draws attention to a September 2017 article in The Atlantic, “ Trump’s War Against the Media Isn’t a War: You need two sides for that ,” which quotes Marty Baron, executive editor of The Washington Post: “We’re not at war; we’re at work.” Baron is right, but for those without any understanding of — or respect for — freedom of the press, first principles can be brushed aside without a second thought.  I invite you to follow me on Twitter, @Edsall .  Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter (@NYTopinion) , and sign up for the Opinion Today newsletter . Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              