   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Politics Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Iowa Anomaly: A Town Ignored by Candidates Image Dick Peterson ate ice cream at Twiins Shoppe in Eagle Grove, a town that has yet to be visited by a presidential campaign this cycle. Credit Max Whittaker for The New York Times By  Nick Corasaniti Jan. 30, 2016 EAGLE GROVE, Iowa — There is a high school auditorium here that could fit 200 people, give or take. Some wood-paneled furniture stores, a pharmacy, a three-garage firehouse and a popular deli dot downtown, looking like a postcard from America’s heartland, if not its heart. Yet no candidate has graced the stage at Eagle Grove High School, nor stopped in to greet diners enjoying a hot Italian roast beef sandwich at Lewright Meats and Deli , nor held a meeting with local firefighters. This agricultural town of roughly 3,500, which gave Iowa its 30th governor, Robert D. Blue, is one of the largest Iowa towns to have not seen a 2016 candidate stop by, an anomaly in a state where many have taken to grousing about the attention showered on them by presidential hopefuls. “I think sometimes, you know, you feel a little bit slighted when you’re small-town America,” said Mickey Cooper, who has owned Eagle Pharmacy since she opened it 30 years ago. “Because I really do believe that we come out and vote.” Eagle Grove is a 90-minute drive north of Des Moines, with grain silos, visible from about a mile away, sticking out from the shimmering snowy plains like a skyline off Highway 17. Its lack of political import reflects both its tucked-away location and county borders. It may be the largest town in Wright County, but it is not the seat; that is Clarion, about a 20-minute drive away. Fort Dodge, the closest big town and a favorite of candidates, is about a 30-minute drive away in a different county. “I would rather see them in person if I could,” said Mark Sampson, 46, a tax accountant who was having lunch in Lewright’s with his wife, Anne. “But I just don’t have time to travel.” The city administrator, Mike Boyd, a fan of politics who ran for mayor in another life but lost, has tried to get candidates to come to town, but never got a response. “In the last election, I tried to get a campaign to come here, and they didn’t bother to even respond,” he said with a sigh. “I’m just surprised that not one of any of them have even called or thought about stopping here in Eagle Grove.” Image Hunter Walters, 6, left, and Destinee Murphy, 9, played on a picnic table in their neighborhood. Eagle Grove is about a 90-minute drive north of Des Moines. Credit Max Whittaker for The New York Times Add Mayor Sandy McGrath to the list of surprised officials. She cited places perfect for candidate rallies — a high school auditorium and a memorial hall — as well as a bigger event space that the town is working on building to entice such high-profile visitors. She worries that, in a live-stream culture where her constituents are getting only a glimpse of candidates through flashing screens or newspapers, they are missing their chance to size up the contenders one to one, the way other Iowans can. “Part of voting for someone, in my opinion, is how candidates can present themselves off the cuff,” Ms. McGrath said. “Whether they truly know it or not or whether they are giving me an answer as to what I want to hear.” Politics can be tricky in Eagle Grove; everyone knows one another, in a place where a construction worker at a downtown bar describes a work site by the name of the owner’s house and three others at the table nod in acknowledgment. In a town whose economy is powered by small businesses that have been in families for generations, taking any kind of public political stance could alienate some of the finite number of customers who trickle in every day to grab a slice of pizza or get some help with taxes. Image Democratic poll numbers appeared on a TV at the Rails Bar & Grill in Eagle Grove on Wednesday. Credit Max Whittaker for The New York Times Indeed, a drive around shows little evidence that the circus that is the Iowa caucuses has tapped into the energy here. Lawn signs are rare; a stop at a blinking traffic light at the main intersection reveals only one, a red-and-white “Cruz to Victory!” sign, about two blocks away. But a lack of lawn signs does not mean a lack of interest. Talk of the election, from Ted Cruz to Bernie Sanders to Donald J. Trump, is heard everywhere. “I just had a Bible study this morning and, of course, we talked about the campaign at the end,” said the Rev. Jason D. Cooper, the pastor of a local Lutheran church. Mr. Cooper has been willing to make the journey to Fort Dodge or Clarion to see candidates. With a young daughter who relies on medication, he has taken his son, Jensen, to meet many of the candidates and ask specific questions on health care. Jensen, 11, is turning his trail experiences into a 4-H project. “I think to some degree we get a little lazy and we watch TV,” Mr. Cooper said. “I still think there’s something about shaking the man’s hand, or woman’s hand, looking them in the eyes, and kind of getting a read on their body language, the body language in the room.” Image Eagle Grove is a town of roughly 3,500 people. “You feel a little bit slighted when you’re small-town America,” said Mickey Cooper, who owns a pharmacy in town. Credit Max Whittaker for The New York Times The closest a candidate has come to Eagle Grove this cycle was when Mr. Cruz held a town-hall-style meeting in Goldfield, about five miles away. His campaign even called down to Lewright’s to send up some pasta salad, hot sandwiches and jerky. Carmen Jones, a manager at the deli, drove it over, and ended up meeting Mr. Cruz. “I was a little star-struck,” she said. “I went and got my sign and started jumping up and down and was like, ‘Yeah, I shook his hand and everything.’ ” For Ms. Jones, though, a swing through town by a candidate would do wonders to politically engage Eagle Grove. “Just stop somewhere,” she said. “Even if you’re rolling through the town, go in, say hi, and back out.” And, she added, it might just help the candidate out, too. “You don’t have to tell the whole world you’re going there because this little whole world will tell everyone that you were there,” she said. “People have cellphones, they’ll record it.” “It spreads like wildfire in these little towns.” Kitty Bennett and Jeremy B. Merrill contributed research.  Find out what you need to know about the 2016 presidential race today, and get politics news updates via Facebook , Twitter and the First Draft newsletter . A version of this article appears in print on , on Page A 21 of the New York edition with the headline: Iowa Anomaly: A Town Ignored by Candidates . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Related Coverage Dispatches From the Final Dash of Presidential Candidates in Iowa Jan. 30, 2016 Image Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              