   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Opinion Supported by Op-Ed Contributor Trump’s Statements Are Not an Obstruction of Justice By  Elizabeth Price Foley May 17, 2017 Leaked portions of a memo penned by James Comey, the former F.B.I. director, have provided new ammunition to President Trump’s opponents. The memo purportedly memorializes a conversation between Mr. Comey and the president regarding Michael Flynn, the former national security adviser. In it, Mr. Comey asserts that the president stated, “He is a good guy. I hope you can let this go.” Widespread howls erupted, including by editors of this paper , asserting that President Trump obstructed justice. But as distasteful as the president’s statements may be, they do not constitute an obstruction of justice. Indeed, if they did, virtually every communication between criminal defense lawyers and investigators would be a crime. Section 1510 of Title 18 of the United States Code addresses obstruction of criminal investigations. It is a narrow statute, criminalizing only willful acts “by means of bribery” that have the effect of obstructing the communication of information about crimes to federal investigators. Even assuming Mr. Comey’s memo is accurate, there is no indication that President Trump willfully attempted to bribe the F.B.I. director. As the Supreme Court stated in United States v. Sun-Diamond Growers of California , “for bribery there must be a quid pro quo — a specific intent to give or receive something of value in exchange for an official act.” Image Donald Trump with Mike Flynn at a campaign event last year. Credit Damon Winter/The New York Times There is no evidence of a quid pro quo. Even assuming, for the sake of argument, that Mr. Trump intended an implied offer of continued employment in exchange for Mr. Comey’s dismissal of the Flynn investigation, it would be implausible for Mr. Comey to construe it as such. Mr. Comey was aware that he was an at-will employee who could be fired by the president at any time, for any reason. Indeed, when President Obama endorsed Hillary Clinton for president in June 2016 — during the height of the F.B.I.’s investigation into Secretary Clinton’s private email server — it would have been similarly implausible for Mr. Comey to construe Mr. Obama’s pro-Clinton remarks as an implicit offer of continued employment, in exchange for dropping the Clinton investigation. Even though Mr. Comey dropped the investigation one month later, he presumably knew that although it would please both Mr. Obama and Mrs. Clinton, it would not insulate him from being fired. But even if one adopted an unprecedentedly broad conception of bribery, Mr. Trump’s purported statement still would not violate Section 1510. The statute is designed to preserve the free flow of information, prohibiting only acts that obstruct investigators’ access to information. Bribery of a potential witness, for example, is behavior prohibited by Section 1510. But telling the F.B.I. director that someone is a “good guy” and expressing the hope that an investigation will cease does not obstruct the free flow of information. Another, broader federal obstruction statute is Section 1505 of Title 18 , but even this statute does not fit. Specifically, Section 1505 declares that anyone who “corruptly” endeavors to obstruct the proper administration of law “under which any pending proceeding is being had before any department or agency of the United States” is guilty of a felony. Even putting aside the difficulty of proving, beyond a reasonable doubt, that President Trump’s brief and generalized words evinced the necessary “corrupt” mind-set, Section 1510 applies only to a “pending proceeding.” In the almost 120 years since Section 1505 and its predecessor have been on the books, no court appears to have ever held that an ongoing F.B.I. investigation qualifies as a “pending proceeding” within the meaning of the statute. Instead, Section 1505 applies to court or court-like proceedings to enforce federal law. In addition to prosecutions (where charges have been filed with a court), such proceedings include actions of enforcement by federal agencies such as the Internal Revenue Service, Securities and Exchange Commission or National Labor Relations Board, in which the agency has broad powers not merely to investigate statutory violations, but also to enforce them via subpoena or other administrative proceedings. The F.B.I., by contrast, possesses only a power to investigate — not enforce — federal criminal violations. When the F.B.I. concludes an investigation, it forwards the evidentiary fruits to the Department of Justice, which then decides whether to prosecute. Indeed, it was Mr. Comey’s arrogation of the Justice Department’s prosecutorial power that led to bipartisan calls for his ouster before the 2016 presidential election. Because the F.B.I. lacks enforcement power, its investigations are not a “pending proceeding,” and courts that have considered the question have so concluded. The legislative history, moreover, confirms that Congress did not intend Section 1505 to reach F.B.I. investigations. The House Judiciary Committee report declared that “attempts to obstruct a criminal investigation or inquiry before a proceeding has been initiated are not within the scope of the proscription” of Section 1505 (italics added for emphasis). No court has interpreted Section 1505’s “pending proceeding” language to include statements such as those purportedly made by President Trump for a reason. Such generic “he’s-a-good-guy-can’t-you-drop-the-charges?” statements are routinely made to investigators and prosecutors. Defending one’s self, client or friend is a natural instinct, and beseeching leniency is not tantamount to obstruction. Holding otherwise would endorse a breathtaking expansion of obstruction, and be utterly inconsistent with First Amendment freedoms. Principled objections to Mr. Trump’s policies and leadership style should not blind opponents to the dangers of repeated, knee-jerk calls for criminal prosecution of the president of the United States. Let the evidence unfold, and reserve serious charges if and when the evidence warrants it. Crying wolf undermines the credibility of the opposition, further divides an already deeply divided country and breeds cynicism about American institutions that is as dangerous to our republic, if not more, than outside meddling. Elizabeth Price Foley , a professor of constitutional law at Florida International University College of Law, is the author of “ Liberty for All : Reclaiming Individual Privacy in a New Era of Public Morality.”  Related Coverage Opinion Richard W. Painter and Norman L. Eisen The Criminal President? May 17, 2017 Image Opinion The Editorial Board Did Mr. Trump Obstruct Justice? May 16, 2017 Image Comey Memo Says Trump Asked Him to End Flynn Investigation May 16, 2017 Image Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              