   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Opinion Supported by The Gentrification Effect By  Thomas B. Edsall Feb. 25, 2015 Image Mayor Marion Barry in 1998. Credit Scott Robinson for The New York Times When Marion Barry first became mayor of Washington in 1979, the city was more than 70 percent black. Whites made up 26.9 percent of residents; 2.8 percent were Hispanic. When Barry died on Nov. 23, Washington had lost its claim to the title Chocolate City. The black population had fallen below 50 percent, the percentage of whites had grown to 35.8 percent and the Hispanic population had reached 10.1 percent. In Chicago, when Harold Washington was elected the first African-American mayor of that city in 1983, blacks and whites each made up roughly 40 percent of the population, with Hispanics at 14 percent. Today, as Rahm Emanuel, the current mayor, finds himself forced into a runoff with Jesus Garcia, blacks have dropped to 32.9 percent, and whites to 31.7. Hispanics are now at 28.9 percent. The nation’s urban centers are changing rapidly. Blacks are moving out, into the suburbs or to other regions of the country. Poverty is spreading from the urban core to the inner suburbs. White flight has slowed and in some cases reversed. Nationally, Hispanics have displaced blacks as the dominant urban minority. The political impact of these changes is primarily being felt within the Democratic Party, where the balance of power is shifting. As well-educated, younger liberal whites gain strength in some cities, their power base will be amplified — a development partly reflected in the marginalization of Marion Barry and his brand of machine politics in Washington before his death. The relatively upscale city-dwelling wing of the national Democratic Party already wields great power, ensuring that same-sex marriage, green initiatives, gender equality and reproductive rights are stressed as much, or more, than issues like wages and jobs. While many cities are experiencing an influx of young whites, those gains are more than offset by the continuing exodus of working- and middle-class whites. The result is a net decline nationwide of the white share of city populations. Hispanic ascendance is apparent in both cities and suburbs, increasing the likelihood of the election of Latinos to local, state and federal office. Over time, blacks stand to lose leverage. Cities have been a crucial base of power for African-American politicians. Insofar as the black population becomes diffuse, black leaders will have to grapple with a decline in black-majority districts, especially city council districts, in cities with declining black populations. William Frey, a Brookings scholar and author of “ Diversity Explosion : How New Racial Demographics Are Remaking America,” responded by email to my query about the political consequences of population changes in the cities and suburbs: With the new black flight to the suburbs following decades of white flight, Hispanics will have an ever bigger role to play in big city politics and even in the suburbs. In Chicago for example whose politics were for decades dictated by different black and white ethnic constituencies, Hispanics are playing a much greater role. This process will be replicated in every region of the country, Frey wrote, “as black suburbanization is fairly pervasive and the biggest source of minority gains in many cities is Hispanics.” Frey pointed toward the rapidly increasing strength of the Latino vote in the 100 largest metropolitan areas. Between 1990 and 2010, the percentage of city dwellers in such areas who are Hispanic grew to 26 percent from 17 percent; and the share of suburban residents who are Hispanic rose to 17 percent from 8 percent. This shifting balance is graphically demonstrated in Figure 1, which is drawn from Frey’s book. One of the most striking alterations of the urban landscape is that there are now more poor people, in raw numbers, living in suburbs than in cities. “The economically turbulent 2000s have redrawn America’s geography of poverty,” Elizabeth Kneebone , a Brookings Institution researcher, wrote in July. While the national poverty rate has remained stubbornly high, the poor are moving. “More of those residents live in suburbs than in big cities or rural communities, a significant shift compared to 2000, when the urban poor still outnumbered suburban residents living in poverty,” according to Kneebone. In February, Governing magazine published a study of census tracts in cities across the nation. The study defined as “gentrification eligible” tracts in which median household income and the value of homes stood below the 40th percentile for the city as a whole. To become gentrified, a census tract would have to move up into the city’s top third in terms of median income and housing values. Mike Maciag, Governing’s data editor, found that the “gentrification rate was 20 percent for the period following the 2000 census” — more than double the 8.6 percent rate of the 1990s. Using data from 1990, 2000 and 2010, Maciag found that in four major cities 50 percent or more of poor census tracts gentrified from 2000 to 2010: Portland, 58.1 percent; Washington, 51.9 percent; Minneapolis, 50.6 percent; and Seattle, 50 percent. Other cities experiencing substantial gentrification were Denver, 42.1 percent; Austin, 39.7 percent; New York, 29.8 percent; Philadelphia, 28.7 percent; San Diego, 27.5 percent; Baltimore, 23.2 percent; and Boston, 21.1 percent. The migration of professionals, often with advanced degrees, into the core of the nation’s cities is graphically illustrated in a study conducted at the University of Virginia. Luke Juday, a research and demographic policy analyst at the University of Virginia, found striking changes between 1990 and 2010 in income and education patterns in Charlotte, N.C. In 1990, as shown in Figure 2, the highest level of education was found in the suburbs, seven to eight miles distant from the heart of Charlotte. By 2012, the Charlotte city center itself had the highest percentage of residents with college degrees. In an email, Juday said the same pattern could be found in cities across the nation. He plans to publish more comprehensive data in March. Education and income move in tandem – that is, levels of per capita income follow the same pattern as levels of educational attainment. This can be seen in Figure 3 , which illustrates the findings from Charlotte for both 1990 and 2012. Using a larger database, Frey notes in “Diversity Explosion” that in 13 of 20 of the cities with the largest black populations, the number of African-Americans declined from 2000 to 2010: Detroit, down 185,392; Chicago, down 181,453; New Orleans, down 118,526; New York, 100,859; and Los Angeles, 54,606. “Clearly, the black presence, which has been the mainstay of many large city populations, is diminishing,” Frey writes. While gentrification is accelerating, it is not characteristic of all major cities. Looking at the racial makeup of the 100 largest cities, Frey found that the number with nonwhite majorities grew substantially from 2000 to 2010, from 42 to 58. According to Frey, of the 16 cities that became majority-minority, Hispanics were responsible for the change in 14, including Phoenix, Austin and Las Vegas. The metropolitan areas that are continuing to experience traditional white flight from the city core are heavily concentrated in the Midwest, particularly in the central time zone, according to Frey’s data. Among them are St. Louis, Kansas City, Columbus, Memphis, Houston and Dallas. The advantages for Democrats of these population transitions are notable. First, in big cities, a transformation of the white versus black struggle for power is increasingly a three-way contest: whites versus blacks versus Hispanics. Racial conflict is becoming more diluted. Second, as the black and Hispanic populations disperse, these heavily Democratic constituencies will influence the election outcomes in an increasing number of congressional districts. This will lessen one of the Democrats’ liabilities: the huge concentration of favorable voters in city districts that vote Democratic by 3 to 1 or better margins, effectively wasting voters who would be more beneficial to the party if located in competitive districts. On the plus side for Republicans, the influx into the suburbs of minorities and the poor – which raises the possibility of attendant tax increases, property value declines, social service demands and crime — could push local whites to the right, into Republican arms. In addition, there is the prospect that Democratic primaries pitting a Latino candidate against an African-American candidate for local or federal office will prompt Republicans to run Latino candidates in the general election, challenging black Democratic nominees. The issues at stake transcend elective politics. The great urban historian Thomas Sugrue, a professor of history and sociology at the University of Pennsylvania, addresses the broader question , “How can the core characteristics of big cities be mobilized to make human life more just and democratic?” In an essay titled “ Diversity, Toleration, and Space in Metropolitan America ” Sugrue writes: In metropolitan America, particularly in those conurbations that have grown increasingly diverse by race and ethnicity in the last few decades, America’s past and its uncertain future collide. On one side are deep historical patterns of segregation and hypersegregation that reinforce racial inequality and hostilities, particularly between black and white; on the other, an increasingly polyglot, perhaps majority minority nation, where the old binaries of race no longer hold. Some futurists contend that by 2040, America will be a brown-hued nation, its once dominant European-descended population blended into a new whole. Others look toward a post-racial America where intermarriage and intermixing will destroy the “ ethnoracial pentagon ,” which rigidly classifies all Americans as African, Asian, Latino, Native American, or white. It’s very hard to predict one way or the other. Outcomes could be either bleak or bright. “Not all are optimistic,” Sugrue continues. The growing trends of class inequality, combined with persistent segregation, have led some to suggest that trends point toward a United States that resembles Colombia or Brazil, places of extraordinary diversity in color, where everyday interracial contact and tolerance are commonplace but where a still-deeply entrenched color hierarchy economically and socially disadvantages those of African and Amerindian descent. Sugrue quite reasonably declines to make predictions: Any one of these prognostications may be correct, but history offers no guide to the future, other than the chastening lesson that the vast majority of past demographic and economic predictions, especially those made with great certainty, are frequently wrong. Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              