   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Briefing Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by The Week in Good News: SpaceX, ‘Black Panther’ and the SmartBroom Image The Falcon Heavy rocket launched from the Kennedy Space Center in Florida on Tuesday. “We want a new space race,” Elon Musk said. “Races are exciting.” Credit Joe Burbank/Orlando Sentinel, via Associated Press By  Des Shoe Feb. 8, 2018 Sometimes it seems as if we’re living under a constant barrage of heavy news. But it isn’t all bad out there. This feature is meant to send you into the weekend with a smile, or at least a lighter heart. Here are seven great things we wrote about this week: Our eyes are on the sky. With a thunderous roar, a rocket called Falcon Heavy arced into the great unknown on Tuesday. The successful launch will give SpaceX — the company founded by Elon Musk, the billionaire entrepreneur — momentum to develop even larger rockets. A playful payload was delivered into space this time round: Mr. Musk’s cherry-red electric sports car. “It’s kind of silly and fun, but silly and fun things are important,” he said. Mr. Musk’s dream is to eventually send people to Mars. Read more » Image Credit Esther Aarts Some animals can count better than you. Our animal friends keep surprising us: Scientists have found that many are able to distinguish not only bigger from smaller, or more from less, but also two from four, four from 10, or 40 from 60. Even spiders and frogs have surprisingly sophisticated number sense. And chimpanzees’ numeric working memory is astonishing. Flash a scattering of numerals on a screen for just 210 milliseconds, then cover the numbers with white squares. A numerically schooled young chimp will touch the squares sequentially to indicate the ascending order of the hidden numbers. Don’t bother trying to do this yourself. You can’t. Read more » Image The co-inventors of the SmartBroom, from left: Andrew Flemming, Will Hamilton and Geoff Fowler. Coming up with the design involved “a fair bit of work in bars,” Mr. Flemming said. Credit Ian Willms for The New York Times Meet an Olympic engineering marvel: the SmartBroom. There are fierce debates about the best way to sweep the ice during the sport of curling. Quick and light, or hard and slow? Three Canadian entrepreneurs spent months pouring their creative energies into a high-tech device to hone curlers’ skills: the SmartBroom. The implement has four sensors in the head that show force in pounds and stroke rate in hertz. The curler can then experiment to see which technique works best. The broom retails for $3,000. Canadians get a discount. Read more » Image Patients in Bhopal, India, waiting to register at a hospital. Government-run hospitals are theoretically free, but known for being of poor quality. Credit Sanjeev Gupta/European Pressphoto Agency India wants to give half a billion people free health care. The plan would offer families up to 500,000 rupees, or about $7,800, of coverage a year. While that sum seems small by Western standards, it would be enough to cover the equivalent of five heart surgeries in India. “This is huge. It’s the biggest step the government has taken in 20 years in health care,” said Dr. Ajay Bakshi, the former chief executive of a hospital chain based in Bangalore. Read more » Image Jim Steyer, left, and Tristan Harris of Common Sense Media, a nonprofit media watchdog group. “We were on the inside,” said Mr. Harris, a former ethicist at Google. “We know what the companies measure.” Credit Peter Prato for The New York Times They helped build a monster. Now they want to tame it. Early Facebook and Google employees have formed the Center for Humane Technology, which is trying to challenge the companies they once helped create. The group plans to unveil an ad campaign at 55,000 public schools in the United States, aiming to educate students, teachers and parents about depression that can come from heavy social media use. “This is an opportunity for me to correct a wrong,” said Roger McNamee, a member of the group and an early investor in Facebook. Read more » Image The ancient Maya city of Tikal in Guatemala. An astonishingly dense web of other structures are hidden in the thick jungle nearby. Credit Wild Blue Media/National Geographic Tens of thousands of Maya structures were revealed by lasers. Researchers found the incredibly dense structures under foliage in northern Guatemala by shooting beams from planes into the tree canopy. The lasers helped create a 3-D picture that suggested an ancient society of such interconnectedness that even experienced archaeologists were surprised. “This world, which was lost to this jungle, is all of a sudden revealed in the data,” said Albert Yu-Min Lin, an engineer. “And what you thought was this massively understood, studied civilization is all of a sudden brand-new again.” Read more » Image T’Challa (Chadwick Boseman, left) facing off against his nemesis Erik Killmonger (Michael B. Jordan). Credit Marvel/Disney An African superhero gets a movie of his own . “Black Panther” is a “jolt of a movie,” says Manohla Dargis, our film critic. Chadwick Boseman as T’challa, the titular superhero, leads a scene-stealing cast that includes Michael B. Jordan, Lupita Nyong’o and Andy Serkis. “Race matters in ‘Black Panther’ and it matters deeply,” Ms. Dargis writes, “not in terms of Manichaean good guys and bad, but as a means to explore larger human concerns about the past, the present, and the uses and abuses of power. That alone makes it more thoughtful about how the world works than a lot of mainstream movies, even if those ideas are interspersed with plenty of comic-book posturing.” Read more » Our photo of the week … Image The last days of the Berlin Wall in 1989. The wall stood for about 10,315 days, but it has now been down for longer than it was up. Credit John Gaps III/Associated Press What would you like to see here? We want to hear from you. Email us at goodnews@nytimes.com . Follow Des Shoe on Twitter: @DesNYT .  Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              