   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Opinion Supported by One Problem for Democratic Leaders Is Democratic Voters By  Thomas B. Edsall Dec. 22, 2016 Image Keith Ellison speaking at a rallying of striking federal contract workers in December. Credit Nicholas Kamm/Agence France-Presse — Getty Images Leaders on the Democratic left who want to represent the have-nots face an obstacle: their own voters. Keith Ellison, a congressman from Minnesota and a candidate for the chairmanship of the Democratic National Committee, argues that Democrats “have to stand for a strong, populist economic message.” He warns that “the way the working class is always controlled is that it’s divided.” A key Ellison supporter in the fight for the chairmanship, Senator Bernie Sanders, believes that Democrats are focused too much with a liberal elite, which is raising incredible sums of money from wealthy people in the upper middle class, but has ignored to a very significant degree the working class and the middle class and low-income people in this country. For a certain stripe of liberal Democrat, free trade agreements have become emblematic of what Sanders describes as a global race to the bottom to boost the profits of large corporations and Wall Street by outsourcing jobs; undercutting worker rights; dismantling labor, environmental, health, food safety and financial laws; and allowing corporations to challenge our laws in international tribunals rather than our own court system. The problem facing Ellison, Sanders and their allies is that despite the success of Sanders’s presidential campaign, the Democratic electorate has actually become less receptive to populism over the past two decades. Mark Muro, the director of the Metropolitan Policy Program at Brookings, analyzed the differences between those communities that supported Hillary Clinton and those that backed Donald Trump. The findings of Muro and Sifan Liu, a Brookings research assistant, suggest that Democrats who are calling for a return to progressive populism will encounter more hurdles than they expect. In their Nov. 29 essay, “ Another Clinton-Trump divide: High-output America vs low-output America ,” Muro and Liu determined that: The less-than-500 counties that Hillary Clinton carried nationwide encompassed a massive 64 percent of America’s economic activity as measured by total output in 2015. In other words, the Clinton counties are the ones in which the economy is booming; they are hardly fertile territory for a worker insurrection. Muro enlarged on his findings in an email: America’s most important, competitive, and often export-intensive industries — what we call its “ advanced ” industries — cluster tightly in such metro counties. Some 70 percent of these crown-jewel industries are concentrated in the 100-largest metros — the core of what Hillary won. In a separate February 2015 study, “ America’s Advanced Industries ,” Muro and four colleagues report that the 50 industries in this heavily high-tech sector are crucial to America’s future growth: These industries encompass the nation’s “tech” sector at its broadest and most consequential. Their dynamism is going to be a central component of any future revitalized U.S. economy. As such, these industries encompass the country’s best shot at supporting innovative, inclusive, and sustainable growth. The importance of these industries does not stop there: At the same time, the sector employs 80 percent of the nation’s engineers; performs 90 percent of private-sector R & D; generates approximately 85 percent of all U.S. patents; and accounts for 60 percent of U.S. exports. Advanced industries also support unusually extensive supply chains and other forms of ancillary economic activity. On a per worker basis, advanced industries purchase $236,000 in goods and services from other businesses annually, compared with $67,000 in purchasing by other industries. When Ellison announced his opposition to the trans-Pacific Partnership on Feb. 15, 2015, he was not speaking to communities that benefit from technology-intensive industries. Ellison declared: The upcoming trade vote in Congress is about one thing: Americans who work hard for a living. It’s about whether we slow down and change the terms of a bad trade deal so that it benefits working people — those Americans who lay awake at night wondering how they’re going to make ends meet. Ellison’s argument rings especially true in those counties Clinton lost, but in the counties where she and other Democrats won strongly, free trade has been enormously beneficial. Take two examples. In Santa Clara County, California, voters chose Clinton over Trump 73-21 . Advanced industry companies with headquarters or major facilities there include Adobe, Apple, Cisco, HP Inc. and Intel Corp. On the East Coast, in Cambridge, Mass., where Clinton won 87.8 percent of the vote to Trump’s 6.4 percent, major corporate employers include Google, Microsoft, and Biogen. According to the Muro study, “ advanced industries produce $2.7 trillion in value added annually — 17 percent of all U.S. gross domestic product. That is more than any other sector, including health care, finance, or real estate,” and, directly and indirectly, “the sector supports almost 39 million jobs — nearly one-fourth of all U.S. employment.” In other words, as Muro made clear in his email: The basic fact is that a huge portion of the nation’s globally competitive economic activity occurs in those blue places. Dominated by highly productive, export-oriented advanced industries, high-tech enterprises, and professional services including the management of companies, this Democratic base is already biased toward globalism — with trade something of a core tenet. Moreover, these places are winning at trade. Muro has produced a map that shows that trade dislocation (measured in trade adjustment assistance certifications) is far less concentrated in Clintonite large metros than it has been in Trumpian rural counties. Not only is expanded trade in the economic interest of economically powerful metropolitan areas that vote Democratic, but Democratic voters themselves are becoming increasingly pro-trade. Here’s the trend data from 2009 to late October 2016, collected by Pew . From 2009 to October 2016, Democratic voters have shifted from a lukewarm pro-trade stance, 48-37, 11 points in favor, to a decisively pro-trade position, 56-31. The Democratic electorate is moving in a pro-trade direction, in opposition to Ellison and Sanders. Conversely, the Republican electorate, egged on by Donald Trump, has flipped. As recently as March 2014, before anyone gave a thought to a Trump presidential bid, Pew found that Republican voters were solidly in the free trade camp, 55-36. By October 2016, Republican voters had become decisively anti-trade, 68-24. Even though Hillary Clinton pointedly withdrew her support for the trans-Pacific Partnership in October 2015, 55 percent of her voters, according to Pew, described the TPP as a “good thing” compared to 24 percent who said it was a “bad thing.” In contrast, Pew reported that 58 percent of Trump loyalists said the TPP was a bad thing, and 17 percent looked on it favorably. If anything, Trump’s adamant opposition to free trade agreements and his call for the adoption of protectionist tax and tariff policies, are likely to push Democratic voters who oppose Trump to shift even further in favor of trade. This push-me, pull-you phenomenon can be seen in at least two other areas — in attitudes toward the Russian president, Vladimir Putin, and toward Julian Assange’s WikiLeaks. Before the 2016 campaign began, Republican voters were far more critical of both Putin and WikiLeaks than Democrats, in part because of the stronger tradition on the right of anti-communism and hostility to government leaks. William Jordan, United States Elections Editor at YouGov , compiled the data in the accompanying graphic, which shows that an increasing share of Republicans have a positive view of Putin. Among Republicans, over the course of Trump’s candidacy, assessments of Putin steadily improved. In December 2014, two years ago, 80 percent of Republican voters viewed Putin unfavorably and 8 percent were favorable. By December 2016, Putin’s unfavorable ratings among Republicans had fallen to 47 percent and his favorable ratings had risen to 37 percent. This is the period during which Putin was accused of allowing Russian hacking of Democratic Party emails, the public release of which proved damaging to the Clinton campaign. Among Democrats during this same period, Putin’s negative ratings worsened, from minus 52 to minus 62. An even more dramatic shift can be seen in the case of WikiLeaks, the conduit for the release of the hacked Democratic Party emails. In June 2013, well before the campaign, when WikiLeaks was best known for publishing secret government documents, Republicans were adamantly critical by negative 47 points. By August 2016, when the damage by WikiLeaks to the Clinton became apparent, Republicans had turned favorable, by 9 points; by December, Republicans were solidly positive in favor of WikiLeaks, by 27 points. This is a 74-point shift in just under three and a half years. Democrats once more moved in the opposite direction, with their disapproval of WikiLeaks moving from negative 3 points in 2013 to negative 28 points this month. Looking again at free trade, the problem for Democrats struggling to find common ground on the issue is that, as Gary Jacobson, a political scientist at the University of California, San Diego, observed in an email, the pull is stronger than the push; people react more strongly to losses from free trade than to prospective gains. In effect, even though a majority of Democrats may support free trade, the minority has, in many cases, suffered from the uneven distributional impact — shuttered local factories and jobs shipped overseas. Those harmed by a policy are much more likely to vote on the issue than those helped. Although Trump’s protectionist proposals to deal with trade and outsourcing could prove disastrous to economic growth over time, he has offered the business community carrots (tax breaks and contracts) and sticks (tariffs and tax penalties) that have for the moment stifled industry opposition and allowed Trump to win over millions of voters. Democrats addressing trade and globalization concerns face not only a base sharply split over these issues, but also growing difficulties in the party’s traditional responses to employment dislocation. Both job training and education have become increasingly ineffective. An August 2016 study by Robert G. Valletta, an economist at the Federal Reserve in San Francisco, “Recent Flattening in the Higher Education Wage Premium,” shows that since 2010 the steadily rising economic gains from completing college and, even more so, from a graduate degree, have leveled off. The swelling number of workers with postsecondary education combined with the worldwide economic slowdown have resulted in a process economists call “skill downsizing.” Those with graduate degrees are forced to take jobs that a college graduate could do, college graduates are forced to take jobs that someone with less education could do, and so on down the line, leaving fewer and fewer good jobs for the newly trained or retrained. What would a progressive approach to globalization look like? A call for a radical reform of the trade negotiation process to curb the leverage of corporate and special interests is one Democratic alternative. This leverage has been institutionalized through the creation of Industry Trade Advisory Committees that grant special access to trade negotiations to corporations ranging from pharmaceuticals to aerospace, energy to investment banks, steel to textiles. Two critics of current trade policy, Jared Bernstein, a former economics adviser to Vice President Biden, and Lori Wallach, the director of Public Citizen’s Global Trade Watch, wrote a September 2016 essay for the American Prospect, “ The New Rules of the Road: A Progressive Approach to Globalization ” in which they acknowledge some basic facts: Despite Trump’s nostalgia for a bygone era when the United States was insulated from global trade, stopping or slowing trade is not at issue. Global trade volumes — imports plus exports — have grown from 25 percent of global GDP in the mid-1960s to 60 percent today. In the United States, that same metric has grown from 10 percent to 30 percent. Bernstein and Wallach go on to point out that trade agreements are not mainly about cutting tariffs to expand trade nor are they about jobs, growth, and incomes here in the United States. Rather, they’re about setting expansive “rules of the road” that determine who wins and who loses. The problem is not with trade itself, which the authors recognize is both desirable and inevitable, but lies instead in the design of the negotiation process: With 500 official U.S. trade advisers representing corporate interests having been given special access to the policy process while the public, press, and largely Congress have been shut out, it is not surprising that corporate interests have thoroughly captured the negotiating process and ensured they are the ‘winners’ under these rules. Bernstein and Wallach make a potentially constructive attempt to deal with one aspect of the Democratic Party’s key dilemma: the struggle to prevail in national elections while accommodating the conflicting interests of diverse constituencies — including the conflict between the Sanders-Warren-Ellison wing and the free-trade wing. Conciliation along these lines has become more difficult as international competition crosses national boundaries, indifferent to domestic regulation and legislation. The 2016 election demonstrates beyond a shadow of a doubt that ducking and weaving around the anguish of displaced workers guarantees sustained minority status. The nation’s displaced work force includes not only the white working class but millions of Hispanics and African-Americans who are loyal to the Democratic Party. Effective and muscular policies focused on reversing the devastation that globalized trade, automation and competition with foreign workers have inflicted on middle and lower income Americans are essential to encourage defecting whites to return to Democratic ranks — and they are also crucial for reviving Election Day enthusiasm among the nation’s growing population of minority voters. In this regard, the political desires of the two groups are not irreconcilable.  Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter (@NYTopinion) , and sign up for the Opinion Today newsletter . Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              