   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Opinion Supported by Should Democrats Embrace the Center or Abandon It? By  Thomas B. Edsall March 22, 2018 Image Supporters of Conor Lamb at his election night party. Credit Gene J. Puskar/Associated Press Over the next six months, Democratic voters will be asked again and again whether their party’s candidates should hew to the center or move to the left. How voters answer that question will help shape the strategic plans of the dozen or more Democrats jockeying to beat President Trump in 2020. The intraparty tension has been simmering for months. Tom Perez, chairman of the Democratic National Committee, goaded party centrists last May when he declared abortion a Democratic litmus test: “Every Democrat, like every American, should support a woman’s right to make her own choices about her body and her health,” Perez said in a statement. “That is not negotiable and should not change city by city or state by state.” Perez later backed off. But in July, Ben Ray Luján, a congressman from New Mexico who is the chairman of the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee, declared that not only would the D.C.C.C. support anti-abortion Democrats, he was already working closely with the Blue Dog caucus — the party’s 18-member conservative House faction, which includes several members who oppose abortion rights — to recruit candidates for 2018. “There is not a litmus test for Democratic candidates,” Luján told The Hill . “You need to make sure you have candidates that fit the district, that can win in these districts across America.” “The Democratic Party cannot give an inch in their opposition to this Administration,” Ilyse Hogue, president of NARAL Pro-Choice America, countered . That is “especially true when it comes to abortion rights. The Democratic Party cannot and will not win if it turns its back on women and our fundamental rights.” “The days of the Blue Dogs are over,” Adam Green, a co-founder of the Progressive Change Campaign Committee , declared in an interview with Bloomberg News. The center-versus-left theme dominated the nasty primary fight for the Democratic nomination in the Illinois Third District on Tuesday. The incumbent, Dan Lipinski , a conservative abortion opponent, edged out his liberal challenger, Marie Newman, 51.2-48.8 — a contest in which several of Lipinski’s own colleagues rooted for his defeat. Social and cultural issues played a huge role in the campaign. “This was a district where some of us as individuals decided to get involved,” Mark Pocan, a Wisconsin Democrat who is co-chairman of the Congressional Progressive Caucus, told Politico . “I would like my husband and I to be considered equal by colleagues in our caucus.” No matter who won, the district was expected to stay in Democratic hands in the general election. The more significant election in the Democrats’ strategic debate was the widely publicized special election victory last week of Conor Lamb, a moderate Democrat, in a mostly white, working-to-middle class western Pennsylvania congressional district. Lamb’s success in flipping a hard-core Republican electorate placed the choice facing Democrats running for president and those running for House and Senate in swing districts and states front and center: Does the path to victory lie in mobilizing the liberal base — by taking explicitly left-wing stands on immigration, as well as gun rights, universal health care, the minimum wage, racial justice and so on? Or is the widespread hatred of Donald Trump — at least among Democrats — sufficient to turn out progressive and minority voters, which would make undecideds the constituency that must be more actively wooed? Lamb pointedly strayed from Democratic orthodoxy on the Second Amendment, minimum wage and Trump’s steel and aluminum tariffs. His willingness to break with his party on those issues was crucial to his victory. As a decorated veteran, Lamb muted Democratic liabilities on military issues. By winning a district that Trump had carried by 20 percentage points, Lamb set off a national debate. “These results should terrify Republicans,” Luján , the D.C.C.C. chair, declared. “There are more than 100 districts more favorable for Democrats than this one, and we look forward to competing hard in every single one.” “ Democrats Can Run the Conor Lamb Strategy Over and Over ” read the headline of an article by Jonathan Chait in New York magazine: There are a lot of Conor Lambs out there. Very early in the election cycle, Democrats recruited candidates with nontraditional backgrounds, especially in the military, who would appeal to voters in red districts. No way, Bob Moser argued in a Rolling Stone essay, “ Why Democrats Should Worry About Conor Lamb’s Victory. ” “The real message of Lamb’s campaign basically boiled down to this: ‘Look at what a fine young normal white fellow I am!’ ” Moser wrote. The “clamor for centrism,” according to Moser, risks deflating the Resistance, turning off nonwhite voters, and dampening the turnout that Democrats should be able to expect in November, given the level of Trump animus across the country. This intraparty struggle will not be resolved on the merits. It will be hammered out by strategists and candidates over the next two and a half years and will ultimately be decided by Democratic primary voters. The evidence suggests that the balance of power among these voters is shifting to the left. Since 1976, there has been a steady reduction in the number of conservative voters participating in Democratic primaries, according to Seth J. Hill and Chris Tausanovitch, political scientists at U.C.L.A. and U.C.S.D. in their paper “ Southern realignment, party sorting, and the polarization of American primary electorates, 1958 — 2012 .” In 1976, conservative Democrats were a significant force within the party, making up 27 percent of its supporters. By 1992, their share fell to 24 percent, still a factor to be reckoned with, providing a crucial source of support to Bill Clinton. By 2012 — the last year for which the authors have data — conservative Democrats had been marginalized in primaries, reduced to 7 percent. Over the latter third of the 20th century, Hill and Tausanovitch write, conservatives sorted into the Republican primary, liberals sorted into the Democratic primary, and centrists began turning out at somewhat lower rates in primary elections. These trends are illustrated in the accompanying graphics for 1976, 1992 and 2012. Each chart breaks the electorate into deciles: the first decile, on the left, is the most liberal; the tenth, on the right, the most conservative. I asked Tausanovitch what the implications were for moderate Democrats looking at 2018 and 2020: Clearly the Democratic primary electorate is more extreme in recent elections than in 1992. This appears to be the result of party sorting: liberals are more likely to be Democrats, and conservatives are more likely to be Republicans than in the past. Asked whether a centrist Democrat like Bill Clinton — who came out for the death penalty , welfare reform , “ rights and responsibilities ” and who publicly rebuffed the rapper and activist Sister Souljah — could win the nomination today, Tausanovitch replied: If primary voters choose the candidate that most closely reflects their views, then there isn’t much hope for a more moderate Democrat. There are a substantial number of Democrats, especially among party officials, activists and consultants, who believe that candidates, especially at the presidential level, need to stake out centrist positions and avoid the perception of being in lock step with liberal interest groups. In a March 17 article in The Hill, Dan Glickman, a former congressman from Kansas, asked “what was the message” Conor Lamb’s victory sent to Democrats? His answer: It means that being a calm, thoughtful and polite moderate is a winning strategy once more. Glickman and his centrist allies are, however, likely to be drowned out by the vociferous opposition to this idea. Not only has the ideological composition of the Democratic electorate shifted leftward, but with Trump in the White House, the liberal wing of the Democratic Party has become energized in a way that has driven a national grass-roots mobilization. Larry Bartels, a political scientist at Vanderbilt, provided insight into the Democratic strategic dilemma in a recent paper, “ Partisanship in the Trump Era .” Bartels determined that Democrats are close to united in their support of an activist government that reduces the gap between rich and poor, regulates the environment and insures access to health care. Still, according to Bartels, cultural issues sow discord among Democrats. While more than a quarter of Democratic voters, 26.3 percent, are “closer to the Republicans than to their fellow Democrats” on cultural attitudes, nearly three quarters of Democrats, 73.9 percent, are more liberal on cultural issues. In an email, Bartels described these culturally liberal Democrats as: relatively more enthusiastic about atheists, gays and lesbians, and Muslims; more negative about Fox News, Walmart, and Christians; more willing to rely on “experts”; less likely to say that “anyone who is willing to work hard can still achieve the American dream”; more likely to deny that “the interests of ethnic and racial minority groups often conflict with those of the white majority”; less “authoritarian” (as measured by questions about child-rearing), further to the left in their ideological self-placements, and more pro-choice on abortion. According to Bartels, Democrats who are most firmly culturally liberal are overwhelmingly white. I exchanged emails with a Democratic consultant who has played a prominent role in presidential, Senate and House elections. He asked to remain anonymous in order to be more candid. The first question I posed was: Could Lamb — who did not face a primary — have won the seat if the contest had been held in 2016, during a general election? The answer was no: We know that PA-18 was not winnable in a year with Hillary at the top of the ticket. Democrats did not win any seat with the demographic profile of this one anywhere in the country in 2016 — save for handful of longtime incumbents. How about 2020? Could a centrist like Bill Clinton get the nomination? I’d say the answer is “no.” I think the politics of the Democratic Party have changed significantly since that time and while it may not be the MOST liberal candidate who wins the nomination, all viable candidates will have to pass a certain threshold of liberal-ness. One of the best case studies of center-left intraparty schism can be seen in the upcoming May 22 runoff election for the Democratic nomination in the 7th Congressional District in Texas — upscale suburban Houston. The two candidates are Lizzie Pannill Fletcher , a local lawyer who led the primary with 29.3 percent and is generally viewed as the moderate, establishment candidate (referred to as Republican-lite by her opponents), and Laura Moser , a liberal political activist, author and former journalist, who came in second with 24.3 percent, and was described by the Houston Chronicle as the candidate of “those who want a full-fledged push to the left to provide the starkest possible contrast with Trump.” The Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee, convinced that Moser would be a weak general election candidate, turned the primary contest into an internecine clash when it released a document on Feb. 22 designed to damage Moser’s bid: She is a Washington insider, who begrudgingly moved to Houston to run for Congress. In fact, she wrote in Washingtonian magazine, “I’d rather have my teeth pulled out without anesthesia” than live in Texas. As of January 2018, she claimed Washington, D.C. to be her primary residence in order to get a tax break. The attack by the D.C.C.C., viewed by many in the liberal wing of the party as aggressively centrist, generated a backlash, mobilizing the left in support of Moser. She now has endorsements from Howard Dean’s group, Democracy for America , Bernie Sanders’ Our Revolution and the insurgent Justice Democrats . “The D.C.C.C.’s ridiculous attacks on Laura Moser are why Democrats nationally have lost over 1,100 seats. Laura is a rising progressive advocate that the workaday people of Texas desperately need,” Jim Hightower , a board member of Our Revolution, said. “She is an active organizer who takes on the Powers That Be on behalf of the Powers That Ought To Be — workers, consumers, small businesses, and just plain folks.” The district has been in Republican hands for 52 years, since George H.W. Bush first won the seat in 1966. In the 2016 election, however, Hillary Clinton beat Trump there, 49-47, abruptly putting the 10-term Republican incumbent, John Culberson, high on the Democrats’ target list. Whoever wins the runoff, the general election will provide a test of Democratic competitive strength in what could be called Hillary districts — Republican-held seats where she did well. These districts are relatively affluent — in the case of the 7th District, the median household income is $71,183, substantially above the national median of $57,617 and the Texas median, $54,727; and well-educated — 50.7 percent with a college degree or higher, compared to 30.3 percent nationwide and 28.1 percent in all Texas. To bring this full circle, the upscale 7th District in Texas and the downscale 18th District in Pennsylvania effectively represent the dilemma of a party increasingly dominated by cultural liberals. In Texas, that may not prove a liability. Both Moser and Fletcher are on the left on predominantly cultural issues like immigration, gun rights and gay rights. Those positions are clearly becoming more acceptable among affluent, college-educated voters, a constituency in which Democrats have been making steady gains. It is in less well-to-do places like Conor Lamb’s Pennsylvania 18 — where 32.9 percent have a college degree or higher and the median household income of $58,600. Among Lamb’s constituents, cultural liberalism is, consequently, a liability — even fatal, electorally speaking. Democrats can be expected to continue to make gains in upscale districts, especially those that voted for Clinton. But in this election cycle — largely because of the Trump presidency — Democrats have a shot, for the first time in over a decade, at taking back a substantial number of the white working class districts that turned Republican in recent elections. As party leaders have been quick to point out , 118 Republican incumbents represent districts in which Trump’s margin of victory was smaller than it was for Conor Lamb. To nominate candidates who, like Lamb, are equipped to win working and middle class swing districts in the general election will require Democratic primary voters to cast strategic rather than ideological ballots — focusing on who can prevail in November, in 2018 but also in 2020. And, perhaps more to the point, Democratic donors will have to decide whether they can back candidates who agree with them 80 percent but not 99 percent of the time. At a moment when Trump has exacerbated polarization, persuading leaders and voters on the left flank of the Democratic Party to think tactically about the 2020 presidential primaries is crucial but problematic. Insofar as Democrats place a higher priority on purity than viability, they may be risking an indeterminate extension of the Trump era. Correction :  An earlier version of this column misspelled the name of a Rolling Stone essayist; he is Bob Moser, not Mosher.  I invite you to follow me on Twitter, @Edsall .  Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter (@NYTopinion) , and sign up for the Opinion Today newsletter . Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              