   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Opinion Supported by Trump Wants America to Revert to the Queens of His Childhood By  Thomas B. Edsall Mr. Edsall contributes a weekly column from Washington, D.C. on politics, demographics and inequality. April 12, 2018 Image Donald J. Trump’s childhood home in the Jamaica Estates section of Queens. Credit Hilary Swift for The New York Times During President Trump’s formative years, Queens — the New York City “outer borough ” in which he grew up — was transformed from an all-white enclave into a racial and ethnic battleground. The forces unleashed in those struggles shaped Trump’s current policies on both immigration and racial integration. Trump was born on June 14, 1946. Until he was four, he lived in a two-story mock Tudor home built by his father, Fred , just south of Grand Central Parkway in Jamaica Estates. In 1950, Donald and his family moved around the corner to a grander 23-room, 9-bathroom redbrick — also built by his father — at 85-14 Midland Parkway. “The Jamaica Estates of Mr. Trump’s boyhood was an exclusive and nearly all-white place, resistant to outsiders and largely impenetrable to minorities,” The Times reported in 2015. In fact, the 1950 census found that at that time, 96.5 percent of the 1.55 million Queens residents were white. Taken together, the Civil Rights Act of 1964 , the Immigration and Nationality Act of 1965 and the Fair Housing Act of 1968 — with attendant white flight — drove the upheavals that converted Queens into one of the most diverse counties in the nation. To those who love it, it is a vital, dynamic, multicultural community of people who enrich one another’s lives in myriad ways. To Trump, residents of modern American inner cities are “living in hell.” In 1960, when Trump turned 14, there were so few Hispanics that the census did not keep count; by 1970, when Trump turned 24, 153,691, or one out of 13, Queens residents were Latino. From 1960 to 1970, the black population of Queens grew from 145,885 to 258,006. By the start of the 1970s, Queens communities like Howard Beach, Corona and Forest Hills became racial combat zones as Mayor John Lindsay sought to build scatter-site public housing in white middle and working-class neighborhoods. Forest Hills, for example — 10 minutes away from Jamaica Estates — became, in the words of this newspaper, the focal point of “one of the most controversial projects in the 38‐year‐old history of the nation’s public housing program.” Signs protesting a proposed affordable housing high-rise proclaimed : “Adolf Lindsay — the middle class will bury you.” Jerry Birbach, a leader of the protests, declared : In my opinion no high‐rise, low‐income housing works out. What happens is it becomes a concentration camp for the elderly where eventually you can’t go out for a loaf of bread or a bottle of milk. Why don’t they build gas chambers for these people? For Trump, the civil rights movement became an intensely personal matter in 1973, two years after he was named president of his father’s firm, the Trump Management Company. In October of that year, the Justice Department charged the company with discrimination against African-Americans at the organization’s rental housing buildings. The firm’s agents secretly put codes such as “No. 9” and “C” for “colored” on applications from minorities. The Trumps, with the aid of Roy Cohn — Trump’s all-purpose lawyer and counselor — bitterly fought the Justice Department, but in 1975 the company settled. The agreement barred the Trump Management Company from “discriminating against any person in the terms, conditions, or privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling.” In addition, the settlement required the Trumps to “thoroughly acquaint themselves personally on a detailed basis” with civil rights law. By July 2016, when Trump had defied the odds and wrestled the presidential nomination away from 16 mainstream Republicans, Queens had become one of the most diverse counties in the country. The white share of the Queens population had fallen to 25.3 percent; almost half of the residents, 47.5 percent, were foreign-born; Hispanics, at 28 percent of the population, outnumbered whites; Asian-Americans made up 26.7 percent; and African-Americans made up 20.7 percent. Jamaica Estates , ZIP code 11432 , where Trump spent his childhood and youth, underwent an even greater transformation. By 2010, the residents were 38.4 percent Asian, 24.9 percent Hispanic, 22 percent black, and 14.4 percent white, according to the census . And by 2016, Queens was no longer Trump turf. He won 21.8 percent of the borough’s voters while Hillary Clinton swept it with 75.4 percent. Donald Trump “grew up in white America,” a former neighbor of the Trumps, told The Times in 2015. “It’s the way of the world; white America is a thing of the past. The white man’s gone.” I asked Robert Sampson , a sociologist at Harvard, about the link between Trump’s roots in Queens and his policies as president. Sampson replied by email: “My immediate reaction is that it was no accident that ‘ All in the Family ’ was set in Queens,” Sampson wrote, just as Steve Bannon used to say about his former boss, “ Dude, he is Archie Bunker .” Sampson pointed out the connection between Trump’s roots in Queens and the themes he has stressed as a candidate and as president: The explosion of immigration and the racial change in the makeup of Queens might have left an especially deep imprint, because his constant references to making America great again evoke an earlier time that was considerably less diverse. Indeed, building walls and stemming the tide of such change seems to be at the heart of Trump’s appeals to a remembered national past, and in this case, of his childhood. Sampson cited the strong link research has found between perceptions of disorder and the presence of immigrants and minorities — independent of actual disorder and crime — provides another clue, one that applies to neighborhoods and arguably up to the level of societies. Jennifer Richeson , a psychologist at Yale, emailed me about her perception that “shifting demographics of one’s town can certainly engender more negative intergroup attitudes and perception.” In a forthcoming paper summarizing research on the effect of growing diversity on white attitudes, “ The Pitfalls and Promise of Increasing Racial Diversity ,” Richeson, Maureen A. Craig, and Julian M. Rucker, psychologists at N.Y.U. and Yale, write: Whites for whom the changing national diversity is salient express (a) more support for conservative policies, including those relevant to race; (b) less support for diversity; (c) more racial resentment and support for the Tea Party; and (d) more support for Donald Trump and anti-immigrant policies. Trump has long since departed Queens, along with more than 900,000 other whites, many of whom became recruits for his presidential campaign. His administration is in many respects an attempt to restore the Queens of his early childhood. Anthony Scaramucci, a friend of the president’s who served 10 days as the White House communications director, grasped Trump’s outer borough appeal to many voters. In a recent interview with Ed Luce of The Financial Times, Scaramucci argued that Trump understood that “America’s ‘aspirational’ working class had become ‘desperational’.” During the campaign, Scaramucci recounted, Trump “would say to us: ‘That tweet’s not for you. You’re probably offended by it. I don’t care. That tweet is for the guy in the flyover states, at the steel plant. If I lose some of the effete Republican elite, what difference does it make?’ ” Luce reports the story of Trump telling foreign investors that his casinos would be flooded by “white trash.” What did he mean by “white trash,” the investors asked. Trump replied: “They’re people just like me, only they’re poor.” Trump is nothing if not consistent in his appeal to this constituency. As recently as April 5, in an appearance in West Virginia , Trump repeated his description of migrants from Mexico as rapists and alleged that “millions and millions” of undocumented immigrants voted against him in the 2016 election. “We cannot let people enter our country,” Trump said: We have no idea who they are, what they do, where they came from. We have no idea what their records are. We don’t know if they’re murderers, if they’re killers, if they’re MS-13. Citing his upbringing in Queens, Trump boasted that federal immigration enforcement officers have gone into towns in Long Island where we’ve taken MS-13 and we’ve actually liberated towns. This is our country, right? I grew up in Long Island, right short of Long Island. And these are great towns; I know every one of them. Trump relishes gory descriptions of the dangers posed by illegal immigrants: They didn’t want to use guns. They use knives because it’s much more painful, where they cut people up, because a bullet is too quick. They want to inflict pain on students, on young women, young girls walking home. And their parents never see them again. They’re cut up. Trump’s views are succinctly expressed in the decision of the United States Citizenship and Immigration Services in February to abandon the country’s commitment to “America’s promise as a nation of immigrants.” In its place, the agency’s mission statement promises to “efficiently and fairly” adjudicate immigration applications “while protecting Americans, securing the homeland and honoring our values.” Trump’s views on race and ethnicity find a wide range of targets. He is conducting a subterranean assault on housing integration — the subject of his family’s court battles in the 1970s. He has delegated the issue to Ben Carson, the secretary of Housing and Urban Development. The most significant decision Carson has made is an attempt to undercut, if not gut, one of the most far-reaching regulations adopted by the Obama administration, the 2015 rule called “ Affirmatively Furthering Fair Housing .” The regulation requires communities receiving federal grants to take significant actions to overcome historic patterns of segregation, achieve truly balanced and integrated living patterns, promote fair housing choice, and foster inclusive communities that are free from discrimination. On Jan. 2, however, Carson announced that enforcement of the regulation would be postponed at least until October 2020. And just last month, HuffPost revealed the existence of an internal HUD memo making it clear that Carson intended to change the agency mission statement, eliminating language calling for the building of “inclusive and sustainable communities free from discrimination.” The new statement would read: HUD’s mission is to ensure Americans have access to fair, affordable housing and opportunities to achieve self-sufficiency, thereby strengthening our communities and nation. On March 28, my colleague Glenn Thrush wrote that the change in the mission statement was part of a broad effort to scale back federal efforts to enforce fair housing laws, freezing enforcement actions against local governments and businesses, including Facebook, while sidelining officials who have aggressively pursued civil rights cases. Thrush noted that in November, Anna Maria Farías, assistant HUD secretary for fair housing and equal opportunity, ordered a halt to “about a half-dozen fair housing investigations” that had been given top priority during the Obama administration. The support Trump has garnered — and continues to maintain — among broad swaths of voters indicates the power and depth of the resentment and animosity in a segment of the American electorate that, before his candidacy, few analysts were fully aware of. Trump’s core supporters — Americans most resistant to the racial and ethnic changes taking place around them — have not been subsumed by a dominant liberal culture, as many had hoped. In a February paper, “ The Racial and Economic Context of Trump Support ,” Eric Knowles, a professor of psychology at N.Y.U., and Linda Tropp, a professor of social psychology at the University of Massachusetts, Amherst, found that neighborhood-level exposure to racial and ethnic minorities predicts greater group threat and racial identification among Whites as well as greater intentions to vote for Trump in the general election. In February, AP/NORC conducted a survey that asked “Do you think Donald Trump is a racist or is not a racist?” Of the 1,337 adults questioned, 57 percent said that he was a racist, and 40 percent said he was not. The same percentage said Trump’s policies “have been bad” for Muslims; 56 percent said that they have hurt Hispanics; and 47 percent said African-Americans were on the losing end. The results raise an interesting question: Will these numbers help or hurt Trump’s re-election effort?  I invite you to follow me on Twitter, @Edsall .  Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter (@NYTopinion) , and sign up for the Opinion Today newsletter . Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              