   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Book Review Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by 10 New Books We Recommend This Week Image Feb. 16, 2017 Lincoln. A fitting subject for Presidents’ Day weekend, and we’ve got two books that feature our 16th president. In fiction: George Saunders’s much anticipated debut novel, “Lincoln in the Bardo.” And in nonfiction: “Six Encounters with Lincoln,” a new perspective on the president by the historian Elizabeth Brown Pryor, who sadly died prior to the book’s publication. Two other timely books were written with young readers in mind — a new biography of Frederick Douglass and another of the artist Jean-Michel Basquiat. It’s books like these that inspire. Pamela Paul Editor of The New York Times Book Review LINCOLN IN THE BARDO , by George Saunders. (Random House, $28.) In this first novel by a master of the short story, Abraham Lincoln visits the grave of his son Willie in February 1862, and is surrounded by ghosts in purgatory. Our critic Michiko Kakutani said the ghosts’ voices “lend the story a choral dimension that turns Lincoln’s personal grief into a meditation on the losses suffered by the nation during the Civil War, and the more universal heartbreak that is part of the human condition.” AUTUMN ,  by Ali Smith. (Pantheon, $24.95.) Smith’s latest novel, the first in a planned quartet pegged to the seasons, is about the friendship between a 101-year-old man and a 32-year-old woman in Britain after the Brexit vote. Our critic Dwight Garner said the book “has a loose structure, almost like that of a prose poem. This form is perfect for Smith, because her mind will go where it wants to go. And where her mind goes, you want to follow.” SIX ENCOUNTERS WITH LINCOLN:  A President Confronts Democracy and Its Demons ,  by Elizabeth Brown Pryor. (Viking, $35.) Pryor’s account of the president’s meetings with ordinary Americans, recorded by their participants, illuminates Lincoln’s thoughts on various issues and raises startlingly relevant questions. Image SHADOWBAHN ,  by Steve Erickson. (Blue Rider, $27.) Twenty years after 9/11, the twin towers suddenly reappear in South Dakota. So does Jesse Presley, Elvis’s stillborn twin. Erickson’s provocative and challenging novel is suffused with music, including a playlist compiled by a character. It’s weird, jaunty and gorgeous. THE BLOOD OF EMMETT TILL ,  by Timothy B. Tyson. (Simon & Schuster, $27.) Tyson’s meticulous and absorbing retelling of the events leading up to the horrific lynching in 1955 includes an admission from Till’s accuser that some of her testimony was false. This book has already made headlines, for good reason. GENERATION REVOLUTION:  On the Front Line Between Tradition and Change in the Middle East ,  by Rachel Aspden. (Other Press, $24.95.) What happened to Egypt’s revolution? This excellent social history argues that despite their politics, young Egyptians did not reject the conservative mores of family and religion, and could not defy them for long. NIGHT OF FIRE ,  by Colin Thubron. (Harper/HarperCollins, $26.99.) A rickety Victorian house by the sea catches fire, killing its inhabitants. As it proceeds from flat to flat, the novel reveals the life stories of the seven victims, who have more in common than it originally seems. Like Thubron’s celebrated travel writing, his novel displays keen observation and narrative flair. Image THE ATTACK ,  by Loïc Dauvillier. Illustrated by Glen Chapron. (Firefly, $24.95.) In this extraordinary graphic adaptation of Yasmina Kadra’s original novel, an assimilated Israeli Arab surgeon embarks on a quest across the Occupied Territories to understand why his wife, without his knowledge, became a suicide bomber. FREDERICK DOUGLASS: The Lion Who Wrote History ,  by Walter Dean Myers. Illustrated by Floyd Cooper. (Harper/HarperCollins, $17.99; ages 5 to 9.) A magisterial glow pervades Myers’s posthumous biography, which shows how important reading was to Douglass. RADIANT CHILD:  The Story of Young Artist Jean-Michel Basquiat ,  written and illustrated by Javaka Steptoe. (Little, Brown, $17.99; ages 4 to 8.) An incandescent biography of the artist, who died in 1988 at the age of 27, but left a vibrant legacy. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page 22 of the Sunday Book Review with the headline: Editors’ Choice | Recent Books of Particular Interest . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              