   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Opinion Supported by A Warning on Trump’s Religious Liberty Order By  Linda Greenhouse May 10, 2017 Some groups on the religious right are complaining that President Trump’s executive order on religion didn’t go far enough. That’s interesting, but what really has me worried is the tepid response from the mainstream. It makes me wonder whether the post-inauguration predictions that Donald Trump would eventually be “normalized” are coming to pass: the warnings that even the president’s harshest critics, worn down by the endless barrage of unpredictable antics emanating from the White House, would inevitably adapt, greeting with relief actions that fall short of the breathtakingly outrageous. (That bar obviously was cleared by the president this week with his firing of the F.B.I. director, James Comey.) True, the May 4 order, entitled “ Promoting Free Speech and Religious Liberty ,” didn’t live up to its scary advance billing. It did not endorse faith-based discrimination against gay people. Nor did it order the Internal Revenue Service, in so many words, not to enforce the statutory prohibition against electioneering by tax-exempt churches. But do those omissions make it “a Trump executive order to shrug at,” an “empty, symbolic act,” as Professor Noah Feldman of Harvard Law School wrote for Bloomberg View? Does it mean that the executive order “turned out to be a big nuthin’,” as Professor Marty Lederman of Georgetown University Law Center wrote on the new and very useful Take Care blog ? Here is what the executive order did, admittedly in convoluted language that almost defies direct translation into English: First, it told the secretary of the Treasury (in whose domain the I.R.S. resides) not to single out for “adverse action” any “individual, house of worship, or other religious organization” for speaking about “moral or political issues from a religious perspective.” The order defines an adverse action as one that “makes unavailable or denies any tax deduction, exemption, credit, or benefit.” Second, under the heading “Conscience Protections With Respect to Preventive-Care Mandate,” it told the heads of three cabinet departments — Treasury, Labor and Health and Human Services — to “consider” repealing the regulatory requirement that employers with religious-based objections to birth control nonetheless have to provide, or arrange for their employees to obtain, insurance coverage for contraception. Third, it instructed the attorney general to “issue guidance interpreting religious liberty protections in federal law.” Allow me to translate. The adverse-action language refers, without naming it, to the Johnson Amendment, which since its adoption in 1954 has required all Section 501(c)(3) organizations, religious and secular, to refrain from endorsing or advocating for or against candidates for elective public office, on pain of losing their tax exemption. Image President Trump signing executive orders on religious liberty in the White House Rose Garden on May 4. Credit Stephen Crowley/The New York Times Hadn’t heard of the 63-year-old Johnson Amendment? Then you’re not among those to whom candidate Trump was speaking back in July while announcing his choice of Mike Pence as his running mate, when he veered off course and observed that “we’re going to get rid of that horrible Johnson Amendment.” And you probably were not a guest at the Family Research Council’s “values voter summit” in September, when Mr. Trump announced that “I will repeal the Johnson Amendment if I am elected your president, I promise.” Nor, most likely, were you in attendance at the National Prayer Breakfast in February, at which President Trump promised to “get rid of and totally destroy the Johnson Amendment.” And in case you haven’t consulted your copy of the 2016 Republican Party platform lately, you may not have known that it calls for the Johnson Amendment’s repeal. President Trump evidently realizes that he can’t repeal or amend a federal law unilaterally. And it’s far from clear that even this Congress would go along with exempting churches from the amendment’s strictures. Repeal of the Johnson Amendment is a project of evangelical churches and their leaders, notably lacking support from the rest of organized religion. In his speech last July, candidate Trump described the amendment as having been “passed by Lyndon Johnson and his group,” language that conjures up some sort of liberal coven, but in fact the amendment was adopted by a Republican Congress and signed into law by President Dwight D. Eisenhower. (Senator Lyndon B. Johnson was the sponsor; I’m not sure who “his group” was.) It reflected a bipartisan consensus that churches should stay out of politics. Seventeen years ago, a thoroughly conservative panel of the federal appeals court in Washington, D.C., rejected a constitutional challenge to the amendment, brought by an evangelical church in upstate New York that had run a full-page in USA Today four days before the 1992 presidential election under the heading “Christians Beware.” The ad warned voters not to cast their ballots for Gov. Bill Clinton, and solicited contributions to pay for the message. The I.R.S. pulled the church’s tax exemption. The church’s “objections are without merit,” the appeals court concluded . Would today’s more conservative judiciary reach the same unanimous result? I don’t know, and neither does the I.R.S., which hasn’t taken the bait since then. In recent years, evidently hoping for a change of heart on the federal bench, the Alliance Defending Freedom, an evangelical litigating organization, has taunted the I.R.S. with an annual “pulpit freedom Sunday,” during which preachers take the pulpit to denounce the Johnson Amendment and express their political views. “The ultimate goal of Pulpit Freedom Sunday is to restore a pastor’s right to speak freely from the pulpit without fearing government censorship or punishment,” Erik Stanley, a lawyer for Alliance Defending Freedom, told CNN , which covered the event last fall. That statement is misleading. The prohibition doesn’t apply to political exhortations in general, but only to endorsements of or opposition to particular candidates. I’ve gone into this level of detail about the Johnson Amendment to demonstrate the deep well of grievance and fervor that President Trump tapped with the mild words of the actual document he signed with a flourish on the “national day of prayer,” in the company of ministers and an Orthodox rabbi or two. The rabbis were clearly an afterthought. “We are giving our churches their voices back,” the president declared. That he didn’t tap deep enough to satisfy all his religious allies speaks volumes about the cause in which they have enlisted him. Just last month, in a pending Supreme Court case I wrote about , religious groups lined up behind a Lutheran church in Missouri (represented by Alliance Defending Freedom) to argue that the state was discriminating against it by deeming it ineligible, by virtue of being a church, for inclusion in a public works project. In other words, the religious claim in Trinity Lutheran Church v. Comer is to the same benefits as the state provides to secular organizations. But in the Johnson Amendment context, the claim is the opposite. It’s a claim to preferential treatment, to a consequence-free involvement in politics that secular nonprofits don’t enjoy. It’s a claim not simply to a seat at the table, but to a place of honor at the head of the table. The divisiveness that would flow from such government-sponsored religious favoritism is apparent, described in a lawsuit filed by the Freedom From Religion Foundation hours after the president issued the executive order. (Several of President Trump’s quotes about the Johnson Amendment in this column are from the complaint that the organization, based in Madison, Wis., filed in Federal District Court there. It is well worth reading.) The Freedom From Religion Foundation’s core argument — and the basis for its claim to legal standing on behalf of its 28,000 members — is that the executive order promises selective nonenforcement, that it “conveys the intended impression that the government is actively sending a message to Christians, and particularly evangelicals, that the I.R.S. will no longer enforce the Johnson Amendment against them, thereby encouraging electioneering by churches and church officials, to the detriment of secular nonprofit groups that are still held to a more rigorous standard of enforcement.” The complaint continues: “The intended policy of selective nonenforcement of electioneering restrictions against churches and other religious organizations has the effect of converting these organizations into unregulated political action committees, effectively excluding billions of dollars from taxation each year.” When President Barack Obama, not so long ago, announced a policy of selective nonenforcement of the immigration laws, offering a temporary deportation deferral to some groups of undocumented immigrants, Republicans denounced the action as lawless and took his administration to court. That history may explain the oblique nature of the Trump executive order. This president is seeking to accomplish with a wink and a nod what his predecessor did explicitly and openly. The same wink and nod mark the other sections of the executive order. Asking cabinet secretaries to “consider” amending the contraception regulation “to address conscience-based objections to the preventive-care mandate” doesn’t mean much divorced from knowledge of the people in a position to take up the president’s invitation. As Emily Bazelon noted in The Times last week, the Department of Health and Human Services “is getting an anti-abortion makeover.” The department is headed by a strongly anti-abortion former congressman, Tom Price. Charmaine Yoest, former head of Americans United for Life, the intellectual powerhouse of the anti-abortion movement, is an assistant secretary and Teresa Manning, a former lobbyist for the National Right to Life Committee, is in line to be a deputy assistant secretary. Both women have spoken dismissively of evidence that the abortion rate goes down when women have more access to better methods of birth control. Finally, there’s the section of the order labeled “religious liberty guidance,” directing the attorney general to “issue guidance interpreting religious liberty protections in federal law.” That would be Attorney General Jeff Sessions, who has worn his religion on his sleeve throughout his public career and who, when asked at his confirmation hearing whether a “secular person” has “just as good a claim to understanding the truth as a person who is religious,” answered, “well, I’m not sure.” Kellyanne Conway, the president’s counselor, spoke last week with Jeremy W. Peters of The Times, who reported that “she pushed back on the premise that Mr. Trump was not following through on his promises” to the anti-abortion movement. While I don’t usually find myself in agreement with Kellyanne Conway, what she said in that interview struck me not only as valid but as highly relevant for understanding the executive order. “If they’re disappointed, then they’re not paying attention,” she said. Exactly.  Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter (@NYTopinion) , and sign up for the Opinion Today newsletter . Related Coverage Trump’s Order on Religious Liberty Pleases a Few, but Lets Down Many Conservatives May 4, 2017 Image Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              