   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Television Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by From ‘The West Wing’ to ‘Veep’: Chiefs of Staff, Imagined and Real Image John Spencer, left, as the White House chief of staff Leo McGarry on “The West Wing,” and President Trump’s chief of staff, John F. Kelly. Credit David Rose/NBC; Doug Mills/The New York Times By  Sopan Deb and Katie Rogers Aug. 22, 2017 In any White House, few roles are more powerful, or more prone to controversy, than the chief of staff. Drama is baked into the job, and tenures often end in intrigue. Reince Priebus survived just 188 days . Now all of Washington is fixated on his successor, John F. Kelly, a retired general who is attempting to instill order in the West Wing — he was central to ousting Stephen K. Bannon — and refocus President Trump on policy, like the Afghanistan strategy speech on Monday night. No wonder, then, that TV shows and movies about the presidency usually feature the chief of staff as a key character. The two of us — a former political reporter-turned-culture writer and a reporter in The New York Times’s Washington bureau — looked at pop culture’s portrayals of chiefs of staff and how these characters square with the likes of Mr. Kelly and Mr. Priebus. SOPAN DEB The defining performance for me for a chief of staff — and I’m fairly certain this is not controversial at all — is John Spencer as Leo McGarry in “The West Wing.” Aside from his charismatic grizzle, the role was educational. I had no idea what a chief of staff did before watching “The West Wing,” and Aaron Sorkin helped explain that in Washington, perhaps the most powerful person is the guy behind the guy. West Wing - Leo McGarry has class Credit Video by PenttiLinkola23 KATIE ROGERS To me, it’s the C. J. Cregg character on “The West Wing” who stands out even to people who don’t follow the show, both because Allison Janney is so talented, and because it’s kind of rare to see a character with such heart and rapid-fire humor on a show about politics. I wonder how C. J. would fare in the Trump White House. DEB It depends which C. J. we are getting. When she was press secretary, Janney played a much lighter version of her. As chief of staff — which happened in Season 6 — C. J. became darker and more brooding. Do you have a favorite C. J. scene? ROGERS Probably when she falls into a swimming pool before accepting the job as press secretary. These days, that would count as foreshadowing. DEB Ha! ROGERS I also think there’s something to be said for C. J. not being an absolutely creepy chief of staff. Don’t you think they’re generally portrayed as creepy? I’m thinking of the character Michael Kelly plays on “ House of Cards .” DEB Doug Stamper. ROGERS Yes. There’s nothing charming about him. And he spent time digging a literal ditch. I guess that technically means the actor did a terrific job portraying Stamper as a tortured soul. DEB Tortured soul is right. And it’s a very different portrayal of a chief of staff than Leo McGarry or C. J. Cregg. Whereas those two played very likable characters just trying to do right by America, Stamper is wholeheartedly trying to do right by Frank Underwood. Stamper is the most cynical view of a person in power, whereas Leo was aspirational. ROGERS The dark portrayal of Doug Stamper kind of reminds me of Cyrus Beene, the chief of staff on “Scandal,” another high-drama show. It’s like a less subtle version of “House of Cards.” The people are still evil but they are somehow still romantics. Credit that to Shonda Rhimes’s flair for creating a dramatic workplace romance. Cyrus is played by Jeff Perry, and the character demonstrates a Stamper-like ability to just murder people who get in his way. He also not-so-secretly feels that he should be president, I think. DEB That’s a key difference. Stamper has no interest in being the guy. Also, don’t forget Olivia Pope is now chief of staff! As for the most unlikely chief of staff portrayal — and let’s not spend too much time on this: Wayne Palmer, “24.” ROGERS I will not dispute that. DEB Just to recap: Wayne Palmer, who was played by D. B. Woodside, served as chief of staff to his brother, President David Palmer. Wayne became president himself in a later season of “24.” He didn’t exhibit the toughness of Leo, the heart of C. J. or the strangeness of Doug. He didn’t exhibit much of anything at all. ROGERS O.K., can we talk about “ Veep ” now? I want to talk about “Veep” now. DEB Thank you for indulging me. ROGERS I saw a tweet recently that said the current White House is like “House of Cards” acted out by the characters on “Veep.” I’ll just leave that there. But there’s something that feels very modern about how media-obsessed the “Veep”-ers are. I love the episode where they’re all watching the bear-attack footage — be forewarned, the video below has profanities — but in that scene, Ben Cafferty is just as funny and, well, crude as everyone else. DEB Kevin Dunn’s portrayal is the perfect mix of Fatigued By Washington combined with Can’t Stay Away. He just looks exhausted all the time. ROGERS For that reason alone, maybe that’s why his portrayal actually seems so true-to life! To live in Washington is to be exhausted and captivated by all of it. Especially now. DEB As for films, the most memorable chief of staff is probably Martin Sheen, who played A. J. MacInerney in “The American President,” Aaron Sorkin’s precursor to “The West Wing.” Every time I watch that movie, I can’t shake watching Jed Bartlett as a chief of staff. ROGERS His character is the gold standard for fictional chiefs of staff. It was predictive of what Leo’s character would be. Supportive, deferential and someone who wasn’t afraid to try and keep the president in check. And he’s ultimately a friend to a person who is in a powerful but isolating office. DEB There was also the brilliant Frank Langella as Bob Alexander in “Dave,” which is the rare chief of staff that is actually villainous. ROGERS Thankfully, in the movies, the good guys prevail in the end. So, shifting into the world I cover now: Do you think the story arc of any of these characters is anywhere close to the six months Priebus spent in the White House? Watching fictionalized portrayals of the job just makes me realize how remarkable the actual, real-life administration is. There’s not even fictional precedent for a president like Trump, who is known to make his staff openly compete against each other and basically keeps an open-door policy in the Oval Office — so how can a chief of staff manage this? DEB The thing is, unless someone gets killed off, major characters usually get to stick around for more than six months! This is what we mean when we say “stranger than fiction.” Priebus’s tenure was remarkably short for a chief of staff. ROGERS If this were, say, “The Apprentice,” we could say he didn’t make it through the season. DEB That doesn’t sound like good television. ROGERS  Scripted television, you mean. I’d watch that reality show. But aren’t we watching already? DEB But now to the future, with John Kelly as chief of staff. As a general, he is a rarity as the gatekeeper to the president. I’m curious what fictional chief of staff you think he most resembles. The closest for me, I suppose, is Leo, but that’s a stretch. Leo was a Vietnam veteran on “The West Wing.” What makes Kelly unique is that he seems less interested in being close friends with Trump and most concerned with bringing order to the White House. That’s not typically how the chief of staff role is portrayed in film and TV. There really is no pop culture equivalent to Kelly’s model of a chief of staff that I can think of. ROGERS I think Kelly is probably just concerned with quieting the chaos associated with the Trump White House, which seems to have the (unintended, I hope) effect of making the place look like the latest season of “Survivor.” DEB We don’t know how this is going to go. Kelly appears to be a disciplined, no-nonsense man who commands respect from everyone on both sides of the aisle, including Trump. But it’s hard to think of Kelly in a pop culture context until we see more of him publicly. ROGERS Well, if we know anything about this president, it’s that he likely wants us to sit back and watch the show. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page C 1 of the New York edition with the headline: The Chief, In Reality And on TV . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              