   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Opinion Supported by Letters The Prodigal Son: A Parable for Today? Feb. 20, 2014 Image Credit Mayumi Otero  To the Editor: Re “ The Prodigal Sons ” (column, Feb. 18): David Brooks makes a touching case for understanding and inclusion in retelling the Gospel parable for modern times. But while ostensibly pleading for unity, he perpetuates a stereotype that continues to divide us: that those who haven’t succeeded are self-indulgent, undisciplined and unambitious. In fact, our country abounds with tens of millions of hard-working and self-sacrificing people who can’t advance because of low wages and a lack of realistic opportunity. They don’t need lectures from fathers, elder brothers or politicians. They do need economic justice, without which our experiment in democracy will fail. MICHAEL ROLAND Nassau, N.Y., Feb. 19, 2014 To the Editor: David Brooks’s analogy between the biblical prodigal son who “took his share of the inheritance early and blew it on prostitutes and riotous living” and the poor in present-day America overlooks a crucial point. Unlike the prodigal son and his (self-)righteous brother, America’s poor and America’s middle and upper-middle classes did not start out equal. Few of America’s poor had any inheritance to squander. This is why redistributive taxation might be a better remedy for poverty in America than bringing the poor and those more fortunate together “for some third goal” like national service. FELICIA NIMUE ACKERMAN Providence, R.I., Feb. 18, 2014  The writer is a professor of philosophy at Brown University. To the Editor: David Brooks’s column is a fine reading of the biblical parable. For the last 50 years, I’ve been preaching about this parable and continue to imagine how the older son might “experience the warming embrace of solidarity and companionship” in the way that Mr. Brooks concludes his commentary. Unlike the younger brother’s shame and humiliation in returning home stripped of the youthful bravado that sent him on his failed journey for independence, the older brother’s hubris in self-crediting obedience is the obstacle preventing his participation in the feast of reconciliation. Unless we suffer circumstances bringing about conversion from self-righteous virtue to the humility of living in gratitude, we waste away in isolation, as the older brother does in choosing to remain outside the family banquet. (Rev.) JOHN B. GIULIANI Redding, Conn., Feb. 18, 2014  The writer is a Benedictine priest. To the Editor: David Brooks says “many of the people who drop out of school, commit crimes and abandon their children are like the younger brother” and then worries that the upper-middle-class “elder brothers” will wind up lecturing “the poor” little brothers. Mr. Brooks probably meant well. But when working 40 hours a week standing on your feet or digging a ditch at minimum wage doesn’t earn enough to meet the poverty line, when attending college is too expensive to be within reach of many, and when the most effective contraceptives are priced out of reach for many married women who wish to remain in the work force, is it really fair to equate “poor” with lazy, negligent or criminal? R. ALTA CHARO Madison, Wis., Feb. 18, 2014  The writer is a professor of law and bioethics at the University of Wisconsin Law School. To the Editor: David Brooks’s insidious analogy that the poor are like the reckless prodigal son highlights a troubling and pervasive prejudice against those not born with advantages. One could easily reverse the analogy and charge that the wealthy are the rule breakers. Yes, we must all come together, as Mr. Brooks concludes, but not because of the false notion that the poor require reform and forgiveness. SHARON AUCOIN North Andover, Mass., Feb. 18, 2014 A version of this article appears in print on , on Page A 24 of the New York edition with the headline: The Prodigal Son: A Parable for Today? . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              