   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Politics Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by On Wikipedia, Donald Trump Reigns and Facts Are Open to Debate Image Donald J. Trump at the University of Iowa in Iowa City on Tuesday. On any day, Mr. Trump’s entry on Wikipedia usually attracts more views than those any of his Republican rivals. Credit Eric Thayer for The New York Times By  Jeremy B. Merrill Feb. 1, 2016 Ted Cruz ’s birthplace became a presidential campaign issue last month when Donald J. Trump added it to his tool belt of attacks. But it was hardly news to the readers and volunteer editors of Mr. Cruz’s Wikipedia page, where mentions of his Canadian birth have been added to, deleted or modified more than 600 times since 2009. For a website with no paid writing staff that is still overcoming an out-of-date reputation for inaccuracy, Wikipedia punches above its weight. As a primer for just about any topic, it is especially powerful in an election season: On the day of the 2012 election, Barack Obama’s and Mitt Romney’s entries alone were read 1.6 million times. The online encyclopedia famously allows the public to edit it, but it also publishes reams of data about itself: about what articles used to say, who added or deleted passages and how many people read the articles. Page-view statistics, for example, show that on some primary days, Wikipedia may be able to predict the winner. Editing archives show debates happening almost in real time, with contributors fighting over facts and policies as if they were the candidates themselves. Electronic fingerprints tell stories, too: A group founded by one of the candidates, logging on anonymously, made edits that put him in a more favorable light. Wikipedia, indeed, can be that influential, and if you know where to look, you can see a virtual version of the presidential race playing out every day. Who Cares? Everyone In the Wikipedia primary, it is not much of a contest. On any day, Donald J. Trump’s entry usually attracts more views than those of his Republican rivals — and on some days, more than all of them combined. On the Democratic side, Bernie Sanders gets more attention than Hillary Clinton. Even Martin O’Malley outpaces Mrs. Clinton on debate nights. Image Images from Wikipedia of Donald J. Trump. Credit Clockwise from top left: Gage Skidmore, Greg Richter, Sgt. Gabriela Garcia, Michael Vadon Page views are not votes, of course, but they could have some predictive power. In each of the first five Republican contests in 2012, the candidate whose Wikipedia page received the most views on voting day (but before winners were announced) also got the most votes. The pattern was not as strong in 2008, when two candidates drew outsize attention, garnering the most page views even on days when they got fewer votes: One was Ron Paul, the other, Barack Obama. Every Night Is Debate Night While most readers will not notice every edit, each article is a palimpsest of added or deleted nuggets, often several in a single day, which are archived under the “ view history ” tab. Some are crude or juvenile smears that are quickly removed by hawk-eyed contributors on the lookout for pranks. On Sept. 19, for example, the name of Ted Cruz’s spouse was changed to “ Edward McMahon ,” then changed back to “Heidi Nelson” six minutes later. But other edits reflect substantive disputes that are often debated on Wikipedia’s discussion pages (the “ talk ” tabs) before they make it to the pages of newspapers, mainstream blogs and TV shows. Mr. Cruz’s birthplace — Calgary, Alberta — became a major issue last month after Mr. Trump questioned whether his rival would be eligible for the presidency. But mentions of his Canadian birth have been added to , modified or deleted from the page at least 636 times dating back to before Mr. Cruz had even run for the Senate. Eventually, the fact led the second paragraph of Mr. Cruz’s entry. (You can view a time-lapse progression of edits to any Wikipedia page on this website .) Until recently, the struggles with drug addiction of Jeb Bush’s daughter, too, were not widely covered in the news media out of deference to the family’s private struggles. But, on Wikipedia, details of those struggles had been added or deleted at least 90 times over many years. One Wikipedia editor who removed a passage about Mr. Bush’s daughter, Noelle, wrote that “these are little more than attacks.” But another complained that the removals were “a rather pathetic attempt at propaganda, the sort of thing the Stalinists used to do, trying to whitewash something out of existence.” “In this digital age,” the editor added, “it’s absurd.” The latter opinion prevailed, once Mr. Bush himself brought it up , and it has remained on the page since. It’s Not Just the Words Does Carly Fiorina look better in red or blue? Does Jeb Bush look “sloppy” without a jacket? In an image-conscious campaign, what will be one of the most viewed photographs of a candidate is in the hands of Wikipedia’s volunteers. Even the most minute of those changes can be subject to months of discussion. But a debate in November over Mr. Trump’s image has been perhaps the most contentious. A photograph of Mr. Trump, wearing a blue suit and with his lips slightly turned down at the corners, briefly replaced an older, poorly lit image of him smiling. And so began a rancorous discussion . “We do not have to use a fake smiling photo like that used on the pages of other politicians,” an advocate of the newer image said. But it was not long before that person was accused of pro-Trump bias for “claiming Trump is not a typical politician.” Several days and a formal vote later, the older image won out. Just a few days later, it was replaced twice more, before the site finally settled on its current photograph of Mr. Trump, listening and expressionless. For now, Mrs. Fiorina still appears in red, and in Mr. Bush’s lead photograph , he is wearing a jacket and a tie. The Editorial Whodunit Wikipedia’s rules generally forbid anyone with a “conflict of interest” to edit pages, but this rule is difficult to enforce because editors are almost never identified by their real names. Instead, editors are identified by user names, which are generally untraceable, or, if they log on anonymously, by their numerical Internet protocol, or IP, address. Sometimes, contributors have been accused of improperly putting a thumb on their own scales. In 2015, a British member of Parliament was accused of sprucing up his own page while adding derogatory information to the articles about his rivals. Also last year, someone using the New York Police Department’s network apparently scrubbed the pages about the department’s darker moments, including the deaths of Eric Garner, Sean Bell and Amadou Diallo. In 2006, several congressional staffs were found to have edited their bosses’ pages. Now, a Twitter account automatically keeps track of any page edited from congressional buildings. It probably does not flatter Mr. Bush that you can read about his 1980s-era work with Miguel G. Recarey Jr . Mr. Recarey, then a medical entrepreneur in Florida, is now a fugitive after being indicted on charges relating to defrauding Medicare . A passage about the episode was deleted from Mr. Bush’s Wikipedia page three times in 2012. Whoever deleted the Recarey passage also deleted a portion claiming that Mr. Bush “interceded” with his father, at the time the president, to release Orlando Bosch, an anti-Castro militant who had been accused of terrorism in Cuba and was in danger of being deported. (The younger Mr. Bush, among others, did lobby his father to free Mr. Bosch, a hero in Miami’s Cuban-exile community, and eventually the Justice Department released him from detention.) In 2012 and 2013, a contributor from the same IP address also deleted passages about Mr. Bush’s daughter’s drug addiction and rewrote the section on Mr. Bush’s education policy. Who was making those edits? The Internet connection for the account demonstrated that whoever made the edits was from the Foundation for Florida’s Future, a nonprofit group that promotes certain education policies championed by Mr. Bush. Mr. Bush founded the organization and, until 2014, served as its chairman and president. Asked about the edits, Jaryn Emhof, a spokeswoman for the foundation, said only, “The page was reviewed for accuracy.” Kitty Bennett contributed research.  Find out what you need to know about the 2016 presidential race today, and get politics news updates via Facebook , Twitter and the First Draft newsletter . Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              