   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Briefing Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Europe Edition Brexit, Salma Hayek, Alabama: Your Thursday Briefing By  Patrick Boehler Dec. 14, 2017 (Want to get this briefing by email? Here’s the sign-up .) Good morning. Here’s what you need to know: Image Credit Parliamentary Recording Unit, via Agence France-Presse — Getty Images •  Theresa May, Britain’s prime minister, is headed to Brussels for a summit meeting of European Union leaders after suffering an unexpected defeat in Parliament: Lawmakers voted to demand a say in Britain’s plans to withdraw from the bloc. Most analysts agree that the next stage of Brexit negotiations will be far more challenging than talks so far . “2018 is going to be a very difficult year,” a former senior British diplomat said. Separately, Facebook said that it had found no evidence of a significant Russian effort to interfere in the Brexit referendum last year. _____ Image Credit Bob Miller for The New York Times • In Washington, House and Senate Republicans reached an agreement on a tax bill ahead of final votes next week. Some key provisions: The corporate tax rate drops to 21 percent next year. Individuals can deduct up to $10,000 in state and local taxes. In the Alabama Senate race, a key factor in the win by Doug Jones, a Democrat, was African-American voters’ distaste for his Republican challenger, Roy Moore . (Here’s a detailed visual analysis of the election results.) Above, a voting station in the city of Birmingham. Here’s how writers from across the political spectrum reacted to the outcome. _____ Image Credit Chad Batka for The New York Times • Today  in #MeToo : The actress Salma Hayek, above, detailed Harvey Weinstein’s crude advances and threats toward her, and said he tried to shut down “Frida,” the Oscar-winning biopic. ( Aquí puedes leer el artículo en español.) And four women accused the hip-hop mogul Russell Simmons of sexual harassment and assault. The latest Times Magazine explored the fallout of revelations and how to move forward in essays and in art . Our gender editor, Jessica Bennett, answered questions from readers. “I will know I’m successful in this role when my job no longer has to exist,” she wrote. _____ Image Credit Pascal Guyot/Agence France-Presse — Getty Images • The Rwandan government released a report accusing French officials of complicity in the 1994 genocide , risking further strains to already icy relations between the two countries. The report, conducted by a Washington law firm, suggests French soldiers trained and equipped their Rwandan counterparts, and gave them cover in the last moments of a genocidal campaign. Some critics noted that Rwanda’s government is an imperfect messenger, but its officials argue that does not absolve an unrepentant France. _____ Image Credit Doug Chayka • This was the year tech giants realized that running powerful online platforms comes with real-world responsibilities, our tech columnist writes . “The big mystery of 2018 and beyond is what, exactly, that responsibility will look like.” Here’s a review of the tech that needed the most fixing this year, and the tech that was actually fixed. Today, a key U.S. regulator is expected to vote to dismantle net neutrality rules. ( Our recent story looked at precedents in Europe.) Business Image Credit Eric Thayer for The New York Times •  As expected, the Federal Reserve raised its benchmark rate by a quarter of a percentage point. We profiled its departing chairwoman, Janet Yellen , above, who is leaving with rock-star status. • Here are some things to watch for when Mario Draghi, the European Central Bank’s president, meets with reporters at the bank’s final meeting of 2017. •  In 2013 , our columnist argued that Bitcoin would die. Seeking redemption, he now points to five assumptions he got wrong . • Lufthansa  dropped its bid to buy Niki, the low-cost carrier, from Air Berlin after E.U. regulators opposed the deal. • A Times tech reporter  thinks artificial intelligence is overhyped (and likes his older phone just fine). •  Here’s a snapshot of global markets . In the News Image Credit Ozan Kose/Agence France-Presse — Getty Images • Leaders  of Muslim nations declared East Jerusalem the Palestinian capital at a summit meeting in Istanbul, producing the strongest response yet to President Trump’s decision to recognize Jerusalem as Israel’s capital. [ The New York Times ] • Casualties from land mines have surged this year, despite an international treaty banning them. Algeria and Mozambique, however, declared themselves free of mines. [ The New York Times ] •  South Africa’s High Court rejected President Jacob Zuma’s efforts to block an inquiry into accusations of influence peddling so widespread that it is known as “state capture.” [ The New York Times ] • Most Haitians can’t afford funerals, and bodies end up in anonymous piles. One group of men is trying to offer the forgotten dead some dignity. [ The New York Times ] • An Irish parliamentary committee recommended that a constitutional ban on abortion be repealed. [ The New York Times ] • British surgeons saved a baby girl who was born with her heart outside her body. [ The New York Times ] • Cigarette smoking has dropped so sharply among American teenagers that vaping and marijuana use are now more common, according to a new survey. [ The New York Times ] • Expect fawning, and some serious questions, at President Vladimir Putin’s annual year-end news conference in Moscow. [ RFE/RL ] Smarter Living Tips, both new and old, for a more fulfilling life. Image Credit Eric Gaillard/Reuters • You probably know you need a flu shot every flu season, but here’s why — and why it’s so important . • Science wants to know: Can you spot a liar ? • Recipe of the day: Cumin-roasted salmon . Noteworthy Image Credit Jamie McDonald/Getty Images • Many soccer fans assume Stuart Taylor, above, Southampton’s backup goalkeeper, has it made: a Premier League salary and a job he is rarely asked to perform. But his long career as a third-choice goalkeeper isn’t the one he saw for himself . • Our Rome bureau chief recalled watching Naples lose its collective marbles last week, as the city celebrated the addition of pizza making to Unesco’s list of intangible cultural heritage. • NASA says this year’s Geminids meteor shower is the best all year. (Never miss the next eclipse, meteor shower or rocket launch with our Space calendar .) •  The 2018  Rock & Roll Hall of Fame inductees are : Bon Jovi, Nina Simone, the Cars, Dire Straits, the Moody Blues and Sister Rosetta Tharpe. Back Story Image “Guess Who’s Coming to Dinner,” the first Hollywood film to portray a kiss between a black man and a white woman , was released 50 years ago this week. It came out only six months after Loving v. Virginia, the U.S. Supreme Court case that struck down laws against mixed marriages in 16 states. Set against the backdrop of the civil rights era, the film — in which a white woman introduces her black fiancé to her parents — didn’t strike hard enough against racism , some critics said. The star, Sidney Poitier, was already a hit with white audiences, and he played a charming, Yale-educated doctor. Our review noted that, “in a burst of incisive recognition that might also characterize the blue-chip film,” one character says, “Civil rights is one thing but this here is something else.” Even so, the film was a milestone for race relations in America, and embodies how times have changed. The same year, the secretary of state, Dean Rusk, offered to resign if his daughter’s marriage to a black man caused embarrassment to President Lyndon B. Johnson. Their wedding photo later appeared on the cover of Time Magazine . Charles McDermid contributed reporting. _____ This briefing was prepared for the European morning and is updated online. Browse past briefings here . You can get the briefing delivered to your inbox Monday through Friday. We have four global editions, timed for the Americas , Europe , Asia and Australia , and an Evening Briefing on U.S. weeknights. Check out our full range of free newsletters here . If photographs appear out of order, please download the updated New York Times app from iTunes or Google Play . What would you like to see here? Contact us at europebriefing@nytimes.com .  Follow Patrick Boehler on Twitter: @mrbaopanrui . Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              