   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Weddings Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Lizzy Divine, Jesse Bordiuk Image Credit Melissa Neubek Sept. 3, 2017 Lizzy Ann Divine and Jesse Hellman Bordiuk were married Sept. 2 in Manchester, Vt. Bill Ewall, a friend of the bride’s family, received permission from the Vermont secretary of state to officiate at the Inn at Manchester. The bride, 27, is the director of campaign strategy in New York for DoSomething.org, a nonprofit organization that encourages young people to help bring about social change. She graduated from New York University. She is the daughter of Mary Ellen Divine and Wallace B. Divine of Stoughton, Mass. The bride's father retired as a director of mission support for the United Nations Department of Peacekeeping and Field Support in Port-au-Prince, Haiti. Her mother, a registered nurse, is the school nurse at Gilmore School in Brockton, Mass. The groom, 28, is an advertising student at Miami Ad School in New York. He was until 2016 a president and owner of Ear Peace Records, a record label, music store, music performance space and art gallery in Berkeley, Calif. He is a son of Dr. Judith Hellman of San Francisco and Dr. John D. Bordiuk of Lincoln, Mass. The groom’s mother is an anesthesiologist. She is a professor and the vice chair of the research department of anesthesia and perioperative care at the University of California, San Francisco. His father, an internist, is the medical director and a founder of Inner Balance Integrative Medicine in Wellesley, Mass. The groom is also a stepson of Staci Montori. The couple met at Brookline High School in Brookline, Mass. They dated briefly then, before reconnecting seven years later. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page ST 15 of the New York edition with the headline: Lizzy Divine,  Jesse Bordiuk . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              