   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index New York Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Cynthia Nixon Asks if Cuomo Is a ‘Real Democrat’ at Campaign Debut Image Cynthia Nixon barely made her campaign launch on time on Tuesday because of subway delays. “Cuomo’s M.T.A.,” she said to laughs. “Three trains pulled out of service.” Credit Sam Hodgson for The New York Times By  Shane Goldmacher March 20, 2018 Making her campaign debut, the actress Cynthia Nixon wasted no time in confronting Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo in sharp and personal terms on Tuesday, questioning his standing as a “real Democrat,” accusing him of being beholden to corporate donors and linking him and his “cronies” to Albany corruption. It was red-hot rhetoric in only the first 24 hours of an already volatile campaign, complete with an attack — followed by an apology — by a close ally of Mr. Cuomo’s that Ms. Nixon was an “unqualified lesbian.” In Ms. Nixon’s first speech, delivered before a small, mostly African-American crowd in Brownsville, Brooklyn, she outlined the themes of her insurgent bid to knock off Mr. Cuomo, a two-term incumbent, in the Democratic primary: tackling the “very segregated” school system, fixing the subways and addressing the “crushing inequality” in the state. One of the crucial early questions surrounding Ms. Nixon is whether Democratic voters have any interest in elevating a celebrity while Donald Trump is serving as president, let alone doing so at the expense of Mr. Cuomo, whose liberal accomplishments as governor include legalizing same-sex marriage, increasing the minimum wage and establishing paid-family leave. “It’s time for an outsider,” Ms. Nixon told reporters of her qualifications. “I’m not an Albany insider.” Appropriating an attack line from her friend Mayor Bill de Blasio and the former presidential candidate Senator Bernie Sanders, Ms. Nixon cast New York as divided between the haves and have-nots. “New York State itself is the single most unequal state in the country,” she said. “This is not something that just happens by mistake. It comes from a choice. It comes from a choice to slash taxes for corporations and the super rich and slash services on everybody else,” she said from a podium. “And it’s a choice we’re used to being made by Republicans like Donald Trump. But for the past eight years, it is a choice that’s been made by our governor, Andrew Cuomo.” Only 4 in 10 voters know anything about Ms. Nixon, according to a Siena College poll released this week. That same survey showed Mr. Cuomo leading her among registered Democrats by nearly 40 percentage points, including among every subgroup including women, liberals and minorities. Mr. Cuomo has cast Ms. Nixon, best known for her role on “Sex and the City,” as a B-list celebrity — “I’m hoping that Brad Pitt and Angelina Jolie and Billy Joel don’t get into the race,” he said dismissively earlier this month — but he and his allies have reacted swiftly to her entry. On Tuesday, Christine Quinn, the former New York City Council speaker who has been discussed as a possible running mate for Mr. Cuomo, called Ms. Nixon an “unqualified lesbian.” Ms. Nixon backed Mr. de Blasio over Ms. Quinn in the 2013 mayor’s race. “Cynthia Nixon was opposed to having a qualified lesbian become mayor of New York City,” Ms. Quinn told The New York Post , referring to her own candidacy. “Now she wants to be an unqualified lesbian to be the governor of New York. You have to be qualified and have experience.” Ms. Quinn later apologized in an interview. “I was clearly trying to make, perhaps, a tongue-in-cheek comparison that was ill-advised and poorly delivered, and I should never have tried to make,” she said, though she stood by her comments that Ms. Nixon was unqualified. Mr. Cuomo was silent on Tuesday, in Albany with no public schedule ahead of the April 1 state budget deadline. But late on Monday, hours after Ms. Nixon jumped into the race, Mr. Cuomo did make a splash of his own: directing the state attorney general to review the Manhattan district attorney’s handling of a 2015 sexual assault allegation into Harvey Weinstein. Celebrities, including the actress and producer Reese Witherspoon , had called on him to do so hours earlier. Ms. Nixon’s candidacy also got a boost from celebrities; a “Sex and the City” co-star, Kristin Davis, and Rosie O’Donnell quickly endorsed her for governor. But in a sign of Ms. Nixon’s political climb ahead, no prominent elected official attended her event on Tuesday; hours afterward, Senator Kirsten Gillibrand of New York formally endorsed Mr. Cuomo. On her first full day as a candidate, however, Ms. Nixon seemed more than happy to put the focus on Mr. Cuomo. She mocked him for his handling of the Metropolitan Transportation Authority, which runs the subways. Ms. Nixon barely made her own launch in time because of train delays. “Cuomo’s M.T.A.,” she said to laughs. “Three trains pulled out of service. We had to get off three trains.” She was just getting warmed up. She hammered Mr. Cuomo for raising only 0.1 percent of his campaign funds from small donors . “If you are a regular person in New York, the chance that Andrew Cuomo is going to care about your concerns is exactly that: 0.1 percent,” she said. She linked him to the Koch brothers, two conservative billionaires who have become liberal boogeymen in recent years. “The Koch brothers donated $87,000 to Andrew Cuomo when he first ran in 2010 because they knew a good investment when they see one,” she said. And she sought to link him to the recent corruption conviction of a former top aide, Joseph Percoco. “There is a reason that people close to Andrew Cuomo keep winding up under indictment for corruption,” she said. (Mr. Cuomo was not accused of any wrongdoing in the Percoco trial and has called his former aide’s behavior a “total aberration.”) Representative Sean Patrick Maloney, a New York Democrat who has endorsed Mr. Cuomo, called Ms. Nixon’s challenge “a wasteful, negative, time-consuming exercise when we should be linking arms and trying to win back the Congress.” ”I can tell you from my perspective down here in Washington, I don’t even know what this fight is about,” he said. “It just seems like a petty squabble when we’ve got a real fight on our hands.” In her speech, Ms. Nixon touched only briefly on her own biography — born in New York City, attended public schools, the mother of public school attendees — as her wife, Christine Marinoni, looked on from the side of the room. She answered a couple of questions from reporters after her speech, including about her qualifications, as her aides tried to drag her from the scrum of cameras and recorders. “I think it is time, not just in New York State but all over this country, to hear from the voices of real people who understand that our government in New York, and in many places across this country, including federally, is in the clutches of millionaires, billionaires and corporations,” she said. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page A 19 of the New York edition with the headline: In Campaign Debut, Nixon Asks if Cuomo Is a ‘Real Democrat’ . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Related Coverage Cynthia Nixon Enters Race for New York Governor March 19, 2018 Image Can Cynthia Nixon Beat Andrew Cuomo? Sizing Up the Race for Governor March 19, 2018 Image Cynthia Nixon Hints at a Run, and Cuomo Flexes His Muscle March 16, 2018 Image Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              