   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index New York Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Grace Notes Unity, Instead of Fear, After Swastikas Are Carved Into a Church Door Image The Rev. Schuyler Vogel is the minister of the Fourth Universalist Church on Central Park West where swastikas were carved into the front doors. Credit Michelle V. Agins/The New York Times By  James Barron March 26, 2017 “We’ve done a pretty good job of covering them up,” the Rev. Schuyler Vogel said. By “them,” he meant two swastikas and the words “race” and “office” that were carved into the front doors of Mr. Vogel’s church, Fourth Universalist Society , on Central Park West at 76th Street, last month. The two words were obscure but ominous: The Nazis had an Office of Racial Policy whose responsibilities included approving SS officers’ marriage plans after investigating the brides-to-be. With dye, Jeff Collie, the church’s building engineer, reduced the swastikas and the words to little more than scratch marks. But the hurt remains sharp, and in this pocket of the Upper West Side, the shock is still fresh: Had the brutes of bigotry been roused to the point that it could happen here? Was cruelty that close by? Mr. Collie said the last vandalism at the church — graffiti — occurred 12 years ago. Now, Fourth Universalist finds itself on a list of disturbing statistics. There was a startling increase in hate crimes in New York City from Jan. 1 to March 19 — 122, up from 59 in the same time last year, according to figures from the New York Police Department. Of those 122, by far the most — 72 — were classified as “Semitic,” up 177 percent from 26 in the same period last year. The breakdown does not show how many incidents involved synagogues or, as in this case, a church. The motivation for the attack, if the attackers were as knowledgeable as they seem, is puzzling. Mr. Vogel said the incident had “long roots that precede the election” — including Donald J. Trump’s affinity for “the language and rhetoric of division,” first as a candidate, then as the president-elect and ultimately as the president. There was speculation that Fourth Universalist was a target because the congregation had voted to be a sanctuary for unauthorized immigrants. “That would be my suspicion,” Mr. Vogel said. “We’ve had the ‘Black Lives Matter’ sign up there for a year or two, so that’s not a new thing.” So far, Fourth Universalist has not taken anyone in — “the call hasn’t come,” Mr. Vogel said, and the church was still figuring out the details. “We could only be a short-term sanctuary, a day or two,” he said. “We simply don’t have a habitable space for someone to live comfortably for extended months or even years.” One problem: The shower needed to be fixed. He said he was heartened by the passage of a City Council bill that would provide $25 million in grants to increase safety at community centers, cultural institutions and nonprofit groups. But the obvious step — cameras — may not be the answer for Fourth Universalist. “There are some privacy questions for us,” he explained, noting that the church hosts Alcoholics Anonymous groups. “We don’t know if we want to make this a place where everyone who comes in is recorded.” Image Photos of the swastikas carved into a door at Fourth Universalist last month. Credit Michelle V. Agins/The New York Times The church also rents space to a synagogue on the Jewish High Holy Days. Even before the swastikas were carved into the door, Fourth Universalist had formed a “rapid response team” to mobilize members to attend demonstrations protesting policies like the Trump administration’s crackdown on unauthorized immigrants. Fourth Universalist planned to hold a discussion of civil disobedience at a service next month. Mr. Vogel said the church was just taking a page from the right’s playbook. “People who have values different from ours have been very intentional about getting those values out there and attaching those values to power,” he said. “As a congregation, we have to be smarter and more strategic.” Mr. Vogel, 32, is new to the neighborhood. He was installed as the senior minister last August after moving to New York from a church in Waukesha, Wis. “Much closer to Trump’s America than this congregation,” he said. Since the attack, he has met people like the local state assemblywoman, Linda B. Rosenthal , who are not new to the neighborhood. “I’ve lived my entire life on the Upper West Side,” she said last week, “but the way I got here was my grandparents had to escape Nazi Germany.” Her maternal grandfather was a rabbi who fled after Kristallnacht, the anti-Jewish attacks in 1938. Some members of the congregation had fled before the attacks, she said, but he had remained to attend to the others. They “could not fathom what would hit them, still wanting to trust the government, or trust that they would be safe,” Ms. Rosenthal, a Democrat, said. German Jews “helped form the reputation of the Upper West Side as a hotbed of discussion and discourse and all of that,” she said, “but a safe place.” She added: “They felt protected, even though there was crime — it wasn’t the prosperous place it is now — but people felt safe, safe from the kind of assaults they felt in Nazi Germany. They felt safe. I felt safe.” So, she said, seeing swastikas carved on a church — “especially a church” — was disturbing. “It feels like an etching into my own flesh,” she said. “The J.C.C.s are vulnerable, the synagogues are vulnerable, but when this church was threatened, it felt like it was encroaching even more. This was outside the regular set of expected victims.” She spoke at an interfaith solidarity vigil at Fourth Universalist two weeks ago, along with Imam Al-Hajj Talib Abdur-Rashid of the Mosque of Islamic Brotherhood in Harlem; Rabbi Marc Margolius of the West End Synagogue; Gale Brewer, the Manhattan borough president; United States Representative Jerrold Nadler, a New York Democrat; and the journalist Bill Moyers, who lives nearby. “We put out 150 chairs and 150 bulletins,” Mr. Vogel said, but between 400 and 500 people showed up. “We ran out of places to put chairs. This gives us a lot of hope that if there were a crisis situation, those people would answer our call — ‘We have people here. Can you bring a meal by?’ Or, ‘Do you have connections in the legal system that can help in an emergency?’” A version of this article appears in print on , on Page A 17 of the New York edition with the headline: A Call to Action After Swastikas Are Carved Into a Church Door . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              