   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index New York Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Hearing the Cohen Case: A Soft-Spoken Judge Who ‘Carries a Big Stick’ Image Michael D. Cohen, a longtime lawyer for President Trump, appeared in Federal District Court on Monday. The judge hearing his case, Kimba M. Wood, has been on the bench for 30 years. Credit Jeenah Moon for The New York Times By  Alan Feuer and Benjamin Weiser April 18, 2018 Judge Kimba M. Wood had barely finished a hearing this week that involved both Michael D. Cohen, President Trump’s lawyer, and — in a stunning revelation — the Fox News host Sean Hannity , when the right-wing media machine started going after her. Info Wars, the conspiracy theory website run by Alex Jones, posted an article that distilled Judge Wood’s 30-year career to a single Saturday five years ago when she performed the wedding of the left-wing billionaire George Soros. Keeping with the theme of a liberal cabal, the Washington Times mentioned that another progressive bigwig — Nancy Pelosi, the House minority leader — was also at the festivities. Joining the attacks, Fox News and NRA TV also soon chimed in. Given its explosive mix of money, sex and presidential politics, the case engulfing Mr. Cohen — an investigation into whether he broke the law by suppressing scandals about women who claimed they had affairs with Mr. Trump — was almost certain to provoke a pushback and present a challenge to any judge called upon to manage it. But the Cohen affair is not Judge Wood’s first turn in the political spotlight. In 1993, after five years on the bench, she was considered for United States attorney general by President Bill Clinton after an earlier nominee, Zoë Baird, was found to have hired undocumented immigrants as nannies and failed to pay their taxes. But Judge Wood was asked to withdraw her name after telling White House screeners that she was sponsoring her own nanny for a green card — which was legal then — and that she had paid all the necessary taxes. “I have fulfilled every legal requirement with respect to the employment of our babysitter,” she said in a statement at the time. “Nevertheless, and after further consultations, I have concluded that in the current political environment, proceeding further with the possibility of my nomination would be inappropriate.” Although she had done nothing illegal, Judge Wood, 74, was a casualty of politics and continued on the bench at Federal District Court in Manhattan, one of the country’s highest-profile judicial stages. Over the years, she has handled several prominent cases, earning a reputation for being sensitive, demanding and — as could be relevant in Mr. Cohen’s matter — unequivocal in her expectations of public officials. “She’s sort of the judicial equivalent of Teddy Roosevelt — she speaks softly but carries a big stick,” said Judd Burstein, a lawyer who has known Judge Wood for more than 30 years. “She has a wonderful judicial temperament. She’s very soft-spoken, very courteous to people, but completely no-nonsense.” In 2010, Judge Wood presided over the guilty pleas of 10 Russian spies who had worked as long-term sleeper agents — a case that inspired the TV show “The Americans.” Six years later, when she sentenced Dean G. Skelos , the former Republican leader of New York’s State Senate, to five years in prison on corruption charges, she admonished him for ignoring his “moral compass.” Image Judge Wood Credit Amy Sussman/Getty Images “Through your crimes,” she said, “you have caused immeasurable damage to New Yorkers’ confidence in the integrity of their government.” ( Mr. Skelos’s conviction was later overturned on appeal after the Supreme Court narrowed the legal definition of corruption. He is scheduled to be retried in June, again before Judge Wood.) The case of Mr. Cohen more or less landed in her lap. In a bit of legal happenstance, Judge Wood was the emergency duty judge last week when Mr. Cohen’s lawyers filed a motion challenging the search warrants that federal agents used to seize his cellphones, papers and computers in a series of extraordinary raids this month . It remains unclear if Judge Wood will continue to preside as the matter moves forward. If criminal charges are ultimately brought, the case would be randomly reassigned. But at least so far, Judge Wood has shown herself to be a firm jurist in the proceeding. On Monday, she compelled Mr. Cohen’s lawyers to reveal that Mr. Hannity had once been one of Mr. Cohen’s clients. Engaging her in a game of cat-and-mouse, the lawyers had at first described Mr. Hannity merely as a “prominent individual” who was embarrassed to be connected to the Cohen investigation. But after another lawyer — representing news media outlets — stepped in to argue that embarrassment was not sufficient grounds to keep the name a secret, Judge Wood decided she agreed. When Mr. Cohen’s lawyers pushed back, Judge Wood was blunt. “I’m directing you to disclose the name now,” she said. And so the lawyer did. Although the moment passed with a burst of audible gasps, Judge Wood’s measured approach — not raising her voice, but not backing down — showed a side of her that lawyers in her court know well. “What’s relevant to this case is that she’s so calm and levelheaded,” said Robert B. Fiske, Jr., a former United States attorney in Manhattan who has known Judge Wood since the 1980s. “Both sides, I think, would be very happy to have her as the judge. She has the ability to come into a high-pressure situation and deal with it intelligently and fairly.” Born in Port Townsend, Wash., in 1944 to a military family, Judge Wood spent her early years following her father, a career Army officer, through different posts in Europe. She studied for a time at the Sorbonne in Paris before attending Connecticut College and then Harvard Law School, graduating in 1969. Between college and law school, Judge Wood got a master’s degree from the London School of Economics while also briefly training, as something of a lark, to become a Playboy bunny. By 1971, she had embarked on what became a high-powered legal career, working briefly at the federal Office of Economic Opportunity and then taking a post at the New York law firm, LeBoeuf, Lamb, Leiby & MacRae, where she was among the first women to work on antitrust matters. In 1988, President Ronald Reagan, a Republican, appointed Judge Wood, a Democrat, to the federal bench in New York with the support of another Republican power broker, former State Senator Alfonse M. D’Amato. At that point, Judge Wood had little experience with criminal law and had never tried a case in front of a jury, but at her confirmation hearings Mr. D’Amato praised her for her “extraordinary background as a legal scholar.” In 1990, in one of her first important cases, Judge Wood sentenced the onetime junk-bond king Michael Milken to 10 years in prison for, among other crimes, violating federal securities laws. At the time, she said that she was issuing the severe prison term to send a message to the financial community, and also because Mr. Milken had chosen to break the law despite his good fortune and intelligence. In her sentencing decision, Judge Wood said that she received several letters from the public asking her to punish Mr. Milken for the “alleged abuses of the 1980s” — the savings-and-loan crisis, the takeover craze and the rampant use of junk bonds. She said that while she sympathized “with the anxiety expressed in these letters,” Mr. Milken should only be held accountable for his own offenses. “Our system of justice,” she went on, “protects everyone from being sentenced on supposition.” Two years later, though, after Mr. Milken had cooperated with federal prosecutors against his Wall Street colleagues, Judge Wood followed the urgings of both sides in the case and reduced his sentence so that he only served about two years. “If society did not reward cooperation by the worst criminals (who often know most about high-level criminal schemes),” she said this time, “many serious crimes would go undetected and/or unpunished.” At that point, Judge Wood was working 12-to-14-hour days, such long stints that she gave up one of her hobbies, painting abstract canvases in oil. To relax, her family said, she played tennis and grew roses at a vacation home in Massachusetts. Her marriage at the time, to the journalist Michael Kramer, ended in divorce. She is now married to Frank E. Richardson, a wealthy financier who once served as an unpaid member of an investment advisory committee for Mr. Soros’s Quantum Industrial Holdings. Though Judge Wood declined to comment on the case, a spokesman for the court, Edward Friedland, said in a statement issued Wednesday: “From time to time, but rarely, Judge Wood and her husband came across George Soros at large social gatherings that had nothing to do with politics. When he asked Judge Wood to perform his wedding, she did so.” Mr. Friedland added that Judge Wood has performed over 40 marriage ceremonies during her time as a judge. But even if Judge Wood moves in rarefied circles, she still maintains an exacting demeanor in the courtroom, lawyers said. “She is very kind and sensitive, but she doesn’t suffer fools lightly,” said Gerald L. Shargel, a veteran defense lawyer who has appeared before Judge Wood on numerous occasions. “She’s always been very gracious in my experience, but anyone who thinks she’s going to be a walk in the park, they’re going to be sadly mistaken.” In 2010, for instance, Bennett Epstein, a lawyer who had a trial before Judge Wood, sent her a letter requesting permission to delay the proceeding so that he could attend the circumcision of his daughter’s child in Philadelphia — if, indeed, it was a boy. “Should the child be a girl,” Mr. Epstein wrote, “not much will happen in the way of public celebration. Some may even be disappointed.” In a flourish of pointed generosity, Judge Wood permitted the delay, but added a handwritten note to the bottom of Mr. Epstein’s missive. “If a daughter is born,” she wrote, “there will be a public celebration in court, with readings from poetry celebrating girls and women.” Correction :  An earlier version of this article misstated a detail of Judge Kimba M. Wood’s marital history. Michael Kramer was her second husband, not her first.The earlier version also misstated the connection between her current husband, Frank E. Richardson, and George Soros’s Quantum Industrial Holdings. Mr. Richardson once served on an investment advisory committee for the group; he did not sit on its board. Follow Alan Feuer on Twitter: @alanfeuer Follow Benjamin Weiser on Twitter: @BenWeiserNYT Doris Burke contributed research.  A version of this article appears in print on , on Page A 15 of the New York edition with the headline: On Bench for Cohen Case: ‘The Judicial Equivalent of Teddy Roosevelt’ . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Related Coverage Judge Says Trump and Cohen Can’t Yet Review Materials Seized by FBI April 16, 2018 Image Independent New York Prosecutors Pose Potential Risk for Trump April 15, 2018 Image Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              