   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Weddings Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Jessica Sleater, Jorge Montalvo Image Credit Michael Ski, Premier Digital Aug. 6, 2017 Jessica June Sleater and Jorge Isaac Montalvo were married Aug. 4 in Manhattan. Msgr. Kevin Sullivan performed the ceremony at the Roman Catholic Church of Our Lady of the Rosary. Ms. Sleater, 36, is a partner in Andersen Sleater Sianni, a law firm, and manages its Manhattan office. She graduated cum laude from Truman State University in Kirksville, Mo., and received her law degree from St. Louis University. She is the daughter of June I. Sleater and William W. Sleater IV, both of Kirkwood, Mo. The bride’s father retired as a sales executive in the St. Louis office of AIM Transportation Solutions, a tractor-trailer truck leasing company. Her mother is a floral designer in Ladue, Mo., for Schnucks Markets, a grocery store chain. Mr. Montalvo, also 36, is the associate commissioner for the New York State Office for Temporary and Disability Assistance, and works in the Manhattan office. He graduated from Dartmouth. He is the son of Esmeraldas Echeverria Montalvo and Abelardo Montalvo of the Bronx. The groom’s father retired as a member of the maintenance staff at B & H Photo and Video, a camera shop in Manhattan. The couple met in Manhattan in 2013 at a fund-raiser for the New Leaders Council, which helps people with progressive views get involved in politics. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page ST 12 of the New York edition with the headline: Jessica Sleater,  Jorge Montalvo . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              