   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Opinion Supported by Letters How Broad Is the President’s Power to Pardon? Nov. 5, 2017 Image President Trump has tried to distance himself from the indictments of former campaign aides. Credit Tom Brenner/The New York Times To the Editor: Re “ Pardoning Manafort Is a Fool’s Errand ” (Op-Ed, Nov. 1): John Yoo’s article notes that some commentators on the right — such as David B. Rivkin Jr. and Lee A. Casey — have “ urged the president to issue a blanket pardon to anyone involved with Russian efforts to influence the 2016 presidential election.” But the president must pardon specific persons, not unnamed persons who have committed a specific crime. Hence, the president cannot issue a “blanket pardon” that retroactively decriminalizes any and all illegal efforts to influence the 2016 elections. He can offer pardons only to specific perpetrators, and each must then choose whether to accept the pardon and thereby admit guilt (albeit without punishment), or reject the pardon and deny guilt. If some perpetrators are not named until after Mr. Trump leaves office, then the decision to pardon them will fall to someone else. HUGH T. BLAIR, LOS ANGELES To the Editor: John Yoo blithely asserts that the president “can clearly pardon anyone — even himself.” Not so fast. Two bedrock principles oppose presidential self-pardon. First, as James Madison wrote, “No man is allowed to be a judge in his own cause, because his interest would certainly bias his judgment, and, not improbably, corrupt his integrity.” Such self-judgment cannot yield a reliable or just outcome. Second, a president with self-pardon power could commit any crime but then immunize himself from any prosecution. Suppose, in a fit of pique, the president killed a federal official within the District of Columbia — a federal crime. A self-pardon would mean no prosecution. If our country’s founders believed anything, it was (and is) that no one is above the law. ROBERT J. SPITZER, CORTLAND, N.Y. The writer is chairman of the political science department at SUNY Cortland and the author of several books on the presidency. To the Editor: Oh, John Yoo! Every time I read something he writes, the same thing happens. I go along with his reasoning, and then suddenly he walks off the edge. I’m left peering over the side, wondering what happened. He seems to use the right argument to come to the wrong conclusion. Concluding that President Trump should fire the special counsel, Robert Mueller, if he is “acting improperly” seems contrary to his argument that Mr. Trump should avoid getting himself into trouble by issuing a blanket pardon. Yes, pardoning everyone associated with the president seems like a disaster, but firing Mr. Mueller is just as much a disaster. TERRY SHAMES, BERKELEY, CALIF. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page A 24 of the New York edition with the headline: How Broad Is the President’s Power to Pardon? . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              