   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Politics Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Right and Left on Robert Mueller and Philando Castile Image “Those were lies, plain and simple,” James B. Comey, the former F.B.I. director, told the Senate Intelligence Committee, discussing White House explanations for his firing. Credit Doug Mills/The New York Times By  Anna Dubenko June 21, 2017 The political news cycle is fast, and keeping up can be overwhelming. Trying to find differing perspectives worth your time is even harder. That’s why we have scoured the internet for political writing from the right and left that you might not have seen. Has this series exposed you to new ideas? Tell us how. Email us at ourpicks@nytimes.com . From the Right Image Family and friends of Philando Castile after Jeronimo Yanez was found not guilty on all counts in the shooting death of Mr. Castile. Credit Elizabeth Flores/Star Tribune, via Associated Press • David French in National Review : “In recent months we’ve seen a number of cases where courts have excused police for shooting citizens even after the police made mistakes — and the citizens were doing nothing wrong — simply because these citizens were exercising their Second Amendment rights.” Many on the left reacted with dismay at the verdict in the Philando Castile case , surmising that this was yet another innocent black man shot by a police officer. Mr. French’s unequivocal condemnation of the verdict is notable for its unique rightward viewpoint. “It is simply false,” he argues, “that the mere presence of a gun makes the encounter more dangerous for the police.” Concealed-carry permit holders, like Mr. Castile, are among the most law-abiding demographics in America. Read more » _____ • William G. Otis in USA Today : “There is no way Comey is anything but a central witness in this investigation — if not a subject. Even less is there a way Mueller can be expected to evaluate Comey’s credibility with the fresh neutrality, arm’s-length curiosity, and objective sharp eye his job demands.” Given his longstanding and close relationship with James Comey, the fired F.B.I. director, can Robert Mueller be free of conflicts in his investigation of a potential obstruction of justice? For Mr. Otis, the answer is a resolute “no.” Though he finds the special counsel to be “an honest, no-nonsense” prosecutor, Mr. Otis, himself a former special counsel for the elder President George Bush, believes that Mr. Mueller should recuse himself for reasons similar to those that led Attorney General Jeff Sessions to recuse himself. Read more » _____ • Ed Rogers in The Washington Post : “If Trump is innocent, Mueller will say it. Trump and Co. should help him reach that conclusion, not make his job more difficult.” Mr. Rogers doesn’t believe that the Trump campaign colluded with Russia. Nor does he believe that President Trump obstructed justice when he fired Mr. Comey. That’s why, despite his “immense respect” for administration surrogates like Newt Gingrich, he hopes the administration will stop disparaging the special counsel. He trusts that Mr. Mueller, an inveterate professional beyond partisan concerns, will conclude his investigation by exonerating the president. After all, he writes, “Mr. Mueller is not part of the resistance.” Read more » _____ • Alice B. Lloyd in The Weekly Standard : “Cultural appropriation complaints have grown increasingly common in critiques of art, literature, cuisine, pop culture, and fashion. These complaints ignore the reality that as long as different cultures interact with each other, they’ll poach each other’s rhythms, patterns, hairstyles, and iconic images.” In the context of American cultural production, Ms. Lloyd argues, “it’s cultural appropriation all the way down.” Moreover, according to Ms. Lloyd, recent attempts by the U.N. to institute intellectual property protections for indigenous peoples “ignores the value of cultural cross-pollination.” Read more » _____ From the Left Image Robert S. Mueller III in 2012. He was appointed special counsel for the Russia investigation last month. Credit J. Scott Applewhite/Associated Press • Bill Scher in Real Clear Politics : “If Trump rids himself of Mueller ... [i]t would be a brazen attempt to shut down the investigation and prevent impeachment. The cold truth is that it might work.” For those on the left who believe that Mr. Mueller’s ouster will set into motion conditions sufficient for Congress to begin impeachment procedures, Mr. Scher has some bad news. Given the partisan polarization in Congress, he writes, the president could get away with much more than Richard Nixon did. Read more » _____ • David Remnick in The New Yorker : “He was, all along, ambivalent, torn between loyalty to the President — or, at least, to the idea of the Presidency — and a desire to do the right thing. When his time came, though, Butterfield testified.” Like Mr. Scher, Mr. Remnick uses the example set by Richard Nixon and the Watergate scandal as a prism through which we can understand the current administration’s position. Mr. Remnick recounts the story of Alexander Butterfield, an assistant to President Nixon who ultimately testified against his boss and “helped end a Presidency.” Who among Mr. Trump’s inner circle, Mr. Remnick wonders, will be this administration’s Butterfield? Read more » _____ • Lance Williams and Matt Smith in Reveal : “When you take Gingrich’s argument to its logical conclusion, no prosecutor who has ever had a political opinion would be allowed to prosecute anybody who has ever had a conflicting political opinion.” Mr. Williams and Mr. Smith concede that the legal team Mr. Mueller has assembled includes many people who have donated to Democratic candidates and organizations. However, they write, this should hardly disqualify them from doing the investigative or prosecutorial work against a Republican administration. Political donations are not enough to prove a conflict of interest. Read more » _____ • Dave Kamper in Jacobin : “If we want to make Medicare for All a reality, we have an obligation to think through the consequences of effectively euthanizing an industry that many have come to rely on for employment.” If the left wants to take a single-payer health care solution seriously, it must also formulate a plan to stave off the jobs lost in the transition. The moral urgency of passing “Medicare for All,” writes Mr. Kamper, “doesn’t mean we can forget about the details,” like the hundreds of thousands of workers in the health care industry. Read more » _____ And Finally, From the Center: • Jonathan Rauch in Brookings : “Suppose most Americans were to conclude that President Trump is unfit for office. How long would it take to remove him? If President Nixon’s example provides any guidance, the answer is: a long time — if ever.” Richard Nixon continues to serve as fertile historical antecedent for our present political moment. In this piece for the Brookings website, Mr. Rauch argues that if there’s anything to learn from Mr. Nixon’s resignation, it’s that “removing Trump would be no easy or quick task.” Read more » _____ • Bob Bauer in Lawfare : “Do the strains on a presidency under investigation require the conclusion that the president cannot be indicted while in office?” Regardless of whether you think President Trump obstructed justice when he fired Mr. Comey, there remains a yet-unanswered legal question concerning the prosecution of a sitting president: Should executive immunity protect against investigations as well? If the reasoning behind not prosecuting a president it to limit the “dramatically destabilizing effects” on government, could one make a similar argument to block an investigation? Mr. Bauer, who served as White House counsel to President Obama, walks through the legal argument and the practical administrative impact here. Read more » _____ Want the Partisan Writing Roundup in your inbox? Sign up for the Morning Briefing Newsletter or the What We’re Reading Newsletter . Have thoughts about this collection? Email feedback to ourpicks@nytimes.com . Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              