   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Times Insider Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Covering Elections: ‘Hours of Boredom, Minutes of Terror’ By  Todd S. Purdum Nov. 7, 2016 Image A line formed outside The New York Times building on Eighth Avenue to buy copies of the paper the day after President Obama was elected in 2008. Credit Earl Wilson/The New York Times The plight of a political journalist on Election Day is akin to that of a pilot or a police officer: hours of boredom, minutes of terror. For most of the day, there is nothing to do. The only thing that matters is how you perform in a few frantic post-midnight moments, often with your bosses literally looking over your shoulder in a packed newsroom as you type. In nearly a quarter-century of campaign coverage at The Times, from New York’s City Hall to the White House, I experienced more than my fair share of ennui and excitement. For a time, I seemed fated never to cover a contest decided by a margin bigger than a point or two. And in 2000, I spent the better part of three weeks covering one that was resolved by just 537 ballots in Florida — and by a single vote on the Supreme Court . The post-traumatic journalistic stress induced by the Florida recount — when the outcome hung in the balance for 36 days — accounted, four years later, for one of my more memorable election night moments. In 2004, early surveys of voters leaving the polls suggested that John Kerry had defeated President George W. Bush; R. W. Apple Jr., The Times’s legendary political reporter, wrote one of his trademark news-analysis pieces (known inside The Times as a “Q-hed”) parsing that result. Image R.W. “Johnny” Apple, left, toasts Adam Clymer, far right, in the New York Times newsroom on election night in 2002. Credit Steve Berman/The New York Times When the second wave of exit polls showed a probable Bush victory, Apple erupted in one of his trademark Vesuvian outbursts and threw up his hands. If the horse-race numbers could change so starkly, he wondered, mightn’t the whole survey — with its reams of demographic information about voter preferences — be flawed? Top Times editors, still stinging from having had to stop the presses to correct the paper’s premature declaration of victory for George W. Bush four years earlier, were reluctant to call the race. But the executive editor, Bill Keller, quietly asked if I could prepare an explanation of how Bush won, and a few fevered minutes later (preserving a little wiggle room), I did, writing for the web and the last couple of hundred thousand copies of the print paper : “From beginning to end, this election was about George W. Bush, and he can claim that an apparently insurmountable lead in the popular vote vindicated his policies, his persistence, his personal qualities and his political strategy. He bet that voters who had shared a traumatic terrorist attack and two wars on his watch would stand by him, and they appeared to.” Maybe not the most penetrating analysis ever, but nice alliteration — and the story had what my former colleague Michael Kelly used to call that best of all possible qualities: doneness. Back in 2000, it was the un-done nature of the election that was so unnerving, for voters and journalists alike. I was working in California then, as chief of The Times’s Los Angeles bureau, and feeling a bit sorry for myself because — since the state wasn’t in play — I’d had no real role in election night coverage for the first time in years. I should have been careful what I wished for. Barely 24 hours later, I was on an airplane, bound first for Washington and then for Tallahassee, where with a dial-up modem and the constant help of a team of talented and generous colleagues, I wrote the lead story of the paper for something like 18 days in a row. Often the story changed two or three times a night. At one point, Dick Cheney had a heart attack right on deadline. On Thanksgiving Day, the executive editor, Joe Lelyveld, called to ask if I could write an analysis of the latest ruling by the Florida Supreme Court. I did, only to get a mournful phone call from my wife, who was stuck at the Tallahassee airport with our baby daughter and no cabs in sight, asking if I’d come pick them up. We shared the last helping of takeout turkey from a restaurant called Chez Pierre. Most Election Days are far more ordinary than the epic one in 2000. As a young reporter on the Metro staff, I would be forced to surrender my desk to the bigfoot correspondents from the Washington bureau and campaign trail who’d sweep into the newsroom to take up their battle stations for the night ahead. My colleague Suzanne Daley once suggested we all play hooky and go to the movies, but I can’t remember whether we actually did. Image The third-floor newsroom at The New York Times on election night, 1928. Credit The New York Times Later, I became one of the bigfeet doing the displacing, but I never lost the special brand of nervous excitement, the butterflies in the stomach, the keyed-up tension that only the first Tuesday after the first Monday in November seems to bring. Over the years, I’ve tried various ways of passing the time until the first wave of exit polls rolls in, sometime in midafternoon: A leisurely lunch with colleagues. A visit to the Museum of the Moving Image in Queens to check out an exhibit of vintage campaign commercials. A trip to the gym. As darkness falls and catered food arrives in the newsroom for the coming siege, the bustle increases. Calls go out to colleagues and campaign aides to check on turnout. If you’re on deck to write the main story, you prepare a few hundred words of material on the campaign just ended that can stand up in the face of either outcome — known in the trade as “B-matter” — and probably two different versions of the top of the story. The same holds true for profiles and analytical pieces. Somewhere in my files, there’s a vivid profile of President John Kerry that never saw the light of day. As actual returns come in and races are called, the pace quickens. The evening is a huge collaborative effort, involving not only reporters, copy editors, and layout and photo editors but the top brass of the newsroom. In 1992, I remember feeling slightly dazed when Max Frankel, then the executive editor, strolled over to my desk to say that the Metro editor, Gerald Boyd, was willing to allow me one modifier, but not two, to describe the victorious Republican Senate candidate, Al D’Amato. (I settled on “battle-scarred.”) Adlai Stevenson once said that an editor is one who separates the wheat from the chaff, and then “prints the chaff.” But the truth is more complicated, and teamwork is the norm. I’ll never forget my very first election night at The Times, in 1982, barely two weeks after I’d joined the paper as a copy boy. A fellow named Mario Cuomo won the governorship of New York, and the pipe-smoking Republican Representative Millicent Fenwick of New Jersey lost an upset Senate race to her Democratic rival, Frank Lautenberg. Jeffrey Schmalz, a brilliant, commanding editor who later pioneered moving first-person coverage of the AIDS epidemic that would kill him, had some last-minute advice for the paper’s longtime New Jersey political writer, Joseph F. Sullivan. “Joe, we should make the point that if Fenwick loses, she retains her House seat,” he ordered. “Naaaah,” Joe replied. “If she loses, she’s out on her —” “Then that’s ,” Jeff said, without missing a beat, “the point we should make!” And we did. Correction :  An earlier version of this article misidentified the candidate for whom The Times prematurely declared victory in 2000. It was George W. Bush, not Al Gore. Todd S. Purdum is a contributing editor at Vanity Fair and a senior writer at Politico, and formerly a longtime political reporter at The Times.  Follow Times Insider on Twitter . A version of this article appears in print on , on Page P 11 of the New York edition with the headline: A Reporter’s Life on Election Day: Wait, Then Hurry Up . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              