   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Art & Design Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by A Blast from Campaigns Past ... A Grab Bag of Vintage Swag Image Women posing in dresses bearing photographs of 1968 presidential candidates. Credit Oregon Historical Society/George Moore Collection By  James Barron Nov. 3, 2016 IN an age of social media, it is easy to forget about old-fashioned presidential campaign memorabilia: posters, fliers, advertisements. The New-York Historical Society has not forgotten. Its exhibition of memorabilia from four presidential campaigns includes items that were watchable, wearable, drinkable and playable. The show, “Campaigning for the Presidency, 1960-1972: Selections from the Museum of Democracy,” tells the stories of those campaigns through more than 120 objects from the Museum of Democracy/Wright Family Collection that belonged to Jordan M. Wright . Before his death in 2008, Mr. Wright assembled what is considered one of the nation’s largest and most comprehensive collections of political campaign memorabilia. Image A paper dress from Richard M. Nixon’s 1968 presidential campaign. Credit Museum of Democracy/Wright Family Collection The watchables are political commercials, including perhaps the most notorious, the “daisy” attack ad that President Lyndon B. Johnson’s campaign ran in 1964. It did not mention his Republican opponent, Barry M. Goldwater, but it played to the public fear that Goldwater would start a nuclear war if elected. He lost, in a landslide. The wearables include paper dresses from 1968. One has Robert F. Kennedy’s face on a white field with red and blue stars. One for Richard M. Nixon has just his surname, in red letters, separated by blue stars. And of course there are campaign buttons, including a trove from 1972 that were intended to appeal to ethnic voters: “Byelorussians for Nixon,” “Bulgarians for Nixon,” “Slovacks for Nixon” and “Syrians for Nixon.” Image Barry M. Goldwater after-shave from 1964. Credit Museum of Democracy/Wright Family Collection The drinkables include “Johnson Juice” and “Gold Water” from 1964. Visitors cannot sample them, but Cristian Panaite, the exhibition’s curator, did. He said the taste was “like 7UP or Sprite.” The show runs through Nov. 27 at the New-York Historical Society, 170 Central Park West, at 77th Street; 212-873-3400, nyhistory.org.  A version of this article appears in print on , on Page C 30 of the New York edition with the headline: Ghosts of Elections Past . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Related Coverage Green-Wood Cemetery, Where Presidential Aspirants Enjoy an Afterlife Nov. 3, 2016 Image Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              