   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Letter of Recommendation Letter of Recommendation: Kidz Bop Image The oddest thing about Kidz Bop’s defanged children’s versions of popular songs is that they have a much more perverse bite than their source material. Credit Illustration by Matt Chase By  Zachary Jason March 23, 2017 We drove four hours to my cousin’s wedding, sweated in the August sun and sobered up, and at 10:00 my wife and I began the snaking slog back to Boston from Vermont. To stay alert, we needed something loud and mindless. On Spotify, I typed in “Hotline Bling,” but I accidentally clicked not on Drake’s passive-aggressive ode to his ex but on a cover, by a group called Kidz Bop. The track started with the same muffled and drippy R.&B. melody, not unlike a porn score. It had the same opening line, “You used to call me on my cellphone.” But the rapper had been replaced by a chorus of exuberant, Auto-Tuned, prepubescent children. It was “The Itsy-Bitsy Spider” meets “Eyes Wide Shut.” It was grotesque, transfixing and supercharged with youth. It jolted us awake. The next line, “late night when you need my love,” had been sanitized: “anytime you need to talk.” I wanted to laugh, vomit and cartwheel all at once. Clean as the lyrics are, the children still sing — ecstatically squeal, really — from the perspective of a man berating his ex-lover for her newfound independence. Delightful questions abound about how the song’s events could possibly unfold with minors. We blasted children’s versions of Rihanna’s “Work” (about a man who wants only sex), Flo Rida’s “Club Can’t Handle Me” (booze-fueled bacchanal) and Pitbull’s “Timber” (sex-fueled bacchanal). Now seldom a week goes by that I, 28 and childless, don’t play selections from the Kidz Bop oeuvre, which covers more than 500 contemporary hits over 34 albums. No sounds simultaneously bewilder and rejuvenate more. Founded near the beginning of this century, at the tail end of the era when substituting a Z for a trailing S informed you that the thing in question was rad, Kidz Bop was the brainchild of the New York lawyers Craig Balsam and Cliff Chenfeld. They sold concerned parents on a new brand of children’s music that Balsam told Bloomberg Businessweek “split the difference between Barney and Britney or Elmo and Eminem,” recording pop, rock and hip-hop covers that offered production value roughly equal to the originals’ but were stripped of their threatening lyrics. The delivery mechanism is a gaggle of tweens who belt the jubilant essence of their youth into each song — until their salad days shrivel about a year later, when the Kidz Bop stable is replenished with fresh talent plucked from nationwide casting calls. This machine has sold more than 17 million albums, earning its claim as the “most popular and most recognized music product in the U.S. for kids age 4-11.” The oddest thing about Kidz Bop is that these defanged versions have a much more perverse bite than their source material. Racy as the originals may be, at least they have adults singing about adult lust and adult plight. With Kidz Bop, the tykes unwittingly present themselves as fireballs of rage and libido, bemoaning their deadbeat boyfriends, exalting their plump rumps and “goodies” that “make the boys jump on it” and “starving” for intercourse. Even so, the exquisitely awful and bizarre bowdlerized lyrics often opt for safety at the expense of meter, rhyme and sense. “Masturbate” becomes “concentrate”; “skirts” turn into “shirts”; even “midnight,” that way-past-bedtime witching hour, is castrated into “tonight.” In “FourFiveSeconds,” which otherwise preserves lyrics about a couple on the verge of splitting up, Kanye West’s line “If I go to jail tonight/Promise you’ll pay my bail,” becomes “If we’re going out tonight/Promise I’ll pay the bill.” Yet this new non sequitur is indeed something a partner trying desperately to forestall a breakup might say. Countless Kidz Bop lines are at once preposterous and more poignant than the original’s. Somehow, though, in its quest to make raunchy radio hits palatable for children, Kidz Bop doesn’t mute human complexity; it isn’t mere camp. Instead, it invents a Wes-Anderson-on-Viagra fantasy world in which children live lives that are overly complex. They suffer emotional, existential and erotic crises that they won’t be able to experience in reality for a decade. At the same time, Kidz Bop serves as unintentionally scorching parody: The Kidz’ shrill chanting amplifies pop’s tropes of lovelorn treacle, monotonous synth and bass and the childishness that dominates the charts. If I had to choose one word that captures Kidz Bop’s effect on my curdled adult soul, I’d pick what Jacques Lacan called jouissance, basically an intense, transgressive sensation of pleasure often mixed with pain that stems from an “excess of life.” Kidz Bop can be too much — synthetic goop, crisp satire, buoyant, hilarious, nauseating, winking, innocent and catchy enough to scramble your cortex; in the shower, in midday meetings and as I try to fall asleep, I’m now regularly haunted by hyper, harmonized tweens shouting Rihanna lyrics (“He see me do me/Dirt, dirt, dirt, dirt, dirt, dirt”). I play one, two, three songs tops before I start to feel as if I’m on a singalong school bus to hell. But a small dose invigorates and focuses my mind just right, a sonic cocktail of espresso and Adderall. As supreme idiocy predominates social media (infinite snapshots of burgers and butts), entertainment (infinite “Real Housewives” and counting) and politics (enough said), flooding my head for a few minutes with the sweet voices of children who know not what they sing delivers an urgent reminder of those precious few years when ignorance really is bliss. When the music fades, I’m mindful of my most basic role as a human adult on this wobbling planet: to help protect the dreams of future children.  Sign up for our newsletter to get the best of The New York Times Magazine delivered to your inbox every week. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page 24 of the Sunday Magazine with the headline: Kidz Bop . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              