   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index New York Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by New York Today New York Today: A Century of Women Voting Image Women voters cast ballots at 57th Street and Lexington Avenue, in 1917. Credit Library of Congress By  Alexandra S. Levine Nov. 6, 2017 Good morning on this muddled Monday. One hundred years ago, women won the right to vote in New York. “We think of it as a simple wave-that-banner, raise-that-picket, but it was very complicated politically,” said Elaine Weiss , the author of “ The Woman’s Hour: The Great Fight to Win the Vote .” The country’s first women’s rights convention, organized by the suffragists Elizabeth Cady Stanton and Lucretia Mott , was in 1848 in upstate Seneca Falls, N.Y. But it wasn’t until 1917 when women here won the right to vote — a breakthrough 70 years and three generations in the making. A few of the women who led the way: Louisine Havemeyer was an art collector whose celebrated collection can be seen at the Metropolitan Museum of Art . Her husband ran an enormously lucrative sugar business in Brooklyn, and Ms. Havemeyer used the fortune to help fund the suffrage movement. “She doesn’t just write the check, but is out there on the barricade,” Ms. Weiss said. In 1917, World War I was going on, and women were questioning how the United States could be fighting to make the world safe for democracy when not all Americans could vote. Ms. Havemeyer, a big fund-raiser for the war, said, “I can’t ask for money for a war for democracy, when women who demand true democracy at home are thrown in prison.” (She was referring to Alice Paul and other suffragists who persevered after being jailed and tortured.) Carrie Chapman Catt was the president of the National American Woman Suffrage Association, which had its headquarters on Madison Avenue. She pledged the loyalty of suffragists to the war effort to show their patriotism, and to show women should have the right to vote, Ms. Weiss explained. “If the suffragists say they’re going to work for the war effort, whether that’s rolling bandages for the Red Cross or raising money or going out into the field as nurses, that will make it much harder for Congress or anyone else to say they don’t deserve the vote,” she said of Ms. Catt’s strategy. Other suffragists (like Susan B. Anthony and Alva Vanderbilt Belmont ) and “ suffragents ” helped make the referendum a reality here . Ms. Weiss called New York “the linchpin” that put our country on the path to pass the 19th Amendment in 1920, granting women across the United States the right to vote. A century later, the work continues. “All of these issues we’re dealing with now — voter suppression and voter rights and racial bigotry — they all come up in the fight for suffragists,” Ms. Weiss added. “It’s a lesson for today; it’s not just history.” With that, a friendly reminder that tomorrow is Election Day. New York City voters will choose our next mayor — Mayor Bill de Blasio , a Democrat, or Nicole Malliotakis , a Republican — and elect City Council members, the public advocate, and the district attorney for Brooklyn. In New Jersey, voters will be deciding who will replace Chris Christie in the race for governor . Here’s what else is happening: Weather A bad case of the Mondays. A cloudy morning followed by a rainy afternoon, with a high around 70 — but by tomorrow, we should be all smiles. In the News • Mayor Bill de Blasio is hoping to make his mark on public safety in New York City with a policing experiment aimed at making officers nicer. [ New York Times ] Image Detective Thomas W. Troppmann, on patrol in Washington Heights, talking to Domingo Basquez, who lives in the neighborhood. Detective Troppmann and his partner, Detective Edwin A. Rodriguez, are part of a new Police Department program intended to deepen ties between officers and residents. Credit Demetrius Freeman for The New York Times • The closing of DNAinfo and Gothamist has created a void in the city’s news landscape that a number of hyperlocal websites hope to fill. [ New York Times ] • Edgemont, a wealthy hamlet in Westchester County, seeks to become its own incorporated village, creating a rift between separatists and city officials who want them to remain. [ New York Times ] • A short message written on a Vietnam soldier’s bunk has led a Virginia veteran on a quest to find out the identity of the man who wrote it. [New York Times] • In an attempt to secure as many last-minute votes as possible, the candidates for New Jersey governor spent the days leading up to the election campaigning in every corner of the state. [ New York Times ] • New Yorkers celebrated the repeal of the 91-year-old Cabaret Law, which had made it illegal for venues in New York City to allow dancing without a special license. [ New York Times ] • Shalane Flanagan won the New York City Marathon, making her the first American woman to win since 1977. [ New York Times ] • You have to get invited, sign a waiver and charter a boat to get to the secretive North Brother Island in the East River. A Manhattan councilman wants to change that. [ New York Daily News] • Today’s Metropolitan Diary: “ Mrs. Rheingold ” • For a global look at what’s happening, see Your Morning Briefing . Coming Up Today • The Public Theater’s Mobile Unit performs “ The Winter’s Tale ,” a Shakespeare romance with tragedy and comedy, at the Roy Wilkins Recreation Center in Jamaica, Queens. 1 p.m. [Free] • Celebrate the suffrage centennial at 100 Years! Stay Tuned … , an evening of stories, poetry, music and other performances, hosted by the Department of Records and Information Services at the TriBeCa Performing Arts Center in Lower Manhattan. 6 p.m. [Free] • Join Christine Quinn, the first female speaker of the New York City Council, and other influential women for a conversation on women’s suffrage and reshaping politics , at the Brooklyn Historical Society. 6:30 p.m. [$5] • Feasts and Festivals , an exhibition and series on food’s role in global cultures, begins with a Day of the Dead party at the Museum of Food and Drink Lab in Brooklyn. 6:30 p.m. [$35, tickets here ] • The author Bettina L. Love discusses how urban youth use hip-hop music to form social, cultural and political identities, at the Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture in Harlem. 6:30 p.m. [Free] • Rangers host Blue Jackets, 7 p.m. (MSG). Nets at Suns, 9 p.m. (YES). • Alternate-side parking remains in effect until Tuesday. • For more events, see The New York Times’s Arts & Entertainment guide . And Finally … Image Credit Pool photo by Jefferson Siegel Before you head to the polls in New York City, we wanted to know: What do you want our mayor, whoever it may be, to accomplish in the next four years? Let us know by posting your thoughts in the comments or by sending an email to nytoday@nytimes.com, including your name, age and the neighborhood in which you live. The New York Today team may contact you for possible inclusion in a column. New York Today is a morning roundup that is published weekdays at 6 a.m. If you don’t get it in your inbox already, you can sign up to receive it by email here . For updates throughout the day, like us on Facebook . What would you like to see here to start your day? Post a comment, email us at nytoday@nytimes.com , or reach us via Twitter using #NYToday . Follow the New York Today columnists, Alexandra Levine and Jonathan Wolfe , on Twitter. You can find the latest New York Today at nytoday.com . Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              