   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Reply All: The 3.2.14 Issue March 14, 2014 Image Credit Stephen Wilkes for The New York Times THE MAMMOTH COMETH The benefits of reintroducing extinct species far outweigh the concerns of naysayers and may also bring us a multitude of answers about our future, evolution, climate and longevity, not to mention a connection to our past. Humans eradicated other species, and this would be righting a wrong done to nature. That can only bode well for us morally, aesthetically, physically and spiritually. It would bring us closer to the creatures we share the planet with. And ultimately it will inspire and teach us to be more humane. CAROLYN BJORLING-NEVINS , St. Augustine, Fla., posted on nytimes.com De-extinction is a compelling idea, but it is ultimately outside the scope of our technological expertise, and it is very likely to remain that way for some time. One major obstacle, largely unexplored in Nathaniel Rich’s article, is the lack of genetic diversity in resurrected populations. There’s a vast difference between bringing back one or two mammoths versus bringing back a functional, breeding population. Populations with low genetic diversity can be prone to inbreeding, depression and low immune function. It is one thing to sequence a genome and quite another to bring back all of the gene variants that characterize a healthy breeding population. SUSAN LETCHER , Purchase, N.Y., posted on nytimes.com The woolly mammoth has its appeal, but spending money to revive extinct species is almost as misdirected as working to colonize Mars. With extinctions going forward by the thousands, not to mention looming climate catastrophe, surely money would be better spent on preventing the loss of another 6,000 species in 2014. This can be done by protecting habitats; preventing predations of, say, the elephant and the dolphin; reducing the acidification of the seas; reversing the accumulation of toxic trash into nation-size islands of ocean flotsam; and so on. HELEN HILL UPDIKE , New York FOR CHRIS LEHANE, YOU CAN NEVER GO TOO FAR In the old days, the leadership of this country would employ a guy like Chris Lehane to fight battles about national values and public policy. Without that leadership, Lehane is a rudderless instigator, choosing what to do based on whim and personal preference, rather than as part of an underlying vision of what the nation could and should be. B. , San Antonio, posted on nytimes.com Most people learn that the reason not to punch someone in the mouth is that they’ll punch you back. It’s sad that no one taught Lehane the basic rules of civility, but it’s embarrassing for American voters that we have allowed our democracy to be hijacked by people who act like he does and find success while debasing our political culture. GIDON ROTHSTEIN , Riverdale, N.Y. THE LAST, DISPOSABLE ACTION HERO I wonder if the studios aren’t being foolish by grooming all these disposable action heroes. The actors in Alex French’s article — and just about every other young white hunk currently being groomed by the industry — are pretty interchangeable and, well, bland. It’s almost certain that the next Clooney, Newman, DiCaprio, etc., is not among them. Eventually Hollywood will be left without any of the bona fide movie stars that made it what it is. VICTOR , New York, posted on nytimes.com What is truly sad is that people don’t understand the beauty and art of these movies. I’m not going to defend all superhero movies. Some are barely worth the film they’re shot on. But I believe that one of the great changes in the art of cinema has been in computer-generated special effects. Movies are a business, and businesses need to make money, and they need to appeal to people. If all movies tried to be masterworks, we wouldn’t have any surviving studios in a year. Then we’d all be pretty bored. DONALD BRAIN , Kansas City, Mo., posted on nytimes.com MARKETING ‘THE LEGO MOVIE’ Heather Havrilesky’s Riff was an excellent observation on the Lego phenomenon that’s been happening for more than a decade now. I am fully grown and still feel a twinge of excitement when I see the latest 2,000-plus-piece Lego Star Wars set. They do what they do really well, and that is why Lego has taken over Mattel as the world’s largest toy manufacturer. It’s hard to blame them. They have figured out what drives people to their products, and they do it masterfully. HOOTAN VAHIDI , Los Angeles, posted on nytimes.com A version of this article appears in print on , on Page 8 of the Sunday Magazine with the headline: Reply All: The 3.2.14 Issue . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              