   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Politics Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by James Comey’s Tumultuous F.B.I. Tenure, in Headlines Image James B. Comey and President Barack Obama at the installation of Mr. Comey as the director of the F.B.I. in Washington in 2013. Credit Stephen Crowley/The New York Times By  Liam Stack and Matthew Haag May 9, 2017 President Trump dismissed the director of the F.B.I. , James B. Comey, on Tuesday afternoon on the recommendation of Attorney General Jeff Sessions, according to Sean Spicer, the White House press secretary. Mr. Comey led the bureau as it undertook the task of investigating the campaigns of both major party nominees for president of the United States. The Clinton campaign was investigated for the candidate’s use of a private email server, and the Trump campaign was investigated over possible ties to Russia. Mr. Comey, appointed director in 2013 by President Obama, publicly commented on the Clinton investigation during the campaign but did not acknowledge the investigation into Mr. Trump’s campaign until after the election was over. Here is a collection of stories in The New York Times about Mr. Comey’s tumultuous time at the head of the Federal Bureau of Investigation. Comey Tried to Shield the F.B.I. From Politics. Then He Shaped an Election. April 22, 2017: Mr. Comey tried to keep the F.B.I. out of politics during the 2017 presidential race as it investigated both Hillary Clinton and the Trump campaign. But he ended up plunging the bureau into the center of a bitter and divisive election. F.B.I. Is Investigating Trump’s Russia Ties, Comey Confirms March 20, 2017: Mr. Comey told the House Intelligence Committee that the F.B.I. was investigating whether members of President Trump’s campaign colluded with Russia to influence the presidential election. The Times collected some of his answers to lawmakers’ questions. Comey Asks Justice Dept. to Reject Trump’s Wiretapping Claim March 5, 2017: Mr. Comey asked the Justice Department to publicly reject President Trump’s allegation that President Barack Obama ordered Mr. Trump’s phones to be tapped. Trump Is Said to Keep James Comey as F.B.I. Director Jan. 24, 2017: President Trump asked Mr. Comey to stay on as the director of the F.B.I. During the campaign, Mr. Trump harshly criticized the agency and the Justice Department. Trump Received Unsubstantiated Report That Russia Had Damaging Information About Him Jan. 10, 2017: Top officials at America’s intelligence agencies showed then President-elect Donald J. Trump a summary of unsubstantiated reports that Russia had collected compromising and embarrassing information about Mr. Trump. Investigating Donald Trump, F.B.I. Sees No Clear Link to Russia Oct. 31, 2016: An F.B.I. investigation into the Russian role in the United States presidential election had so far not found any conclusive or direct link between Donald J. Trump and the Russian government. Emails in Anthony Weiner Inquiry Jolt Hillary Clinton’s Campaign Oct. 28, 2016: Days before the presidential election, Mr. Comey said in a letter to Congress that the F.B.I. had come across additional emails in an unrelated case pertaining to its investigation of Hillary Clinton’s email service. F.B.I. Director James Comey Recommends No Charges for Hillary Clinton on Email July 5, 2016: Mr. Comey said Hillary Clinton was “extremely careless” in using a private email address and server but recommended no criminal charges against her, ending an investigation that loomed over her campaign.  Get politics and Washington news updates via Facebook , Twitter and in the Morning Briefing newsletter . Related Coverage Updates and Reactions to F.B.I. Director Comey’s Firing May 9, 2017 Image F.B.I. Clarifies Comey’s Testimony on Clinton Emails May 9, 2017 Image Deputy Attorney General’s Memo Breaks Down Case Against Comey May 9, 2017 Image Show All Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              