   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Business Day Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Common Sense As Boeing Goes, So Goes the Stock Market Image The Boeing factory near Seattle where 787s are being assembled. Credit Tegra Stone Nuess for The New York Times By  James B. Stewart Aug. 10, 2017 Move over, FANG stocks — the listings powered by Facebook, Apple, Netflix and Google. Here’s a one-word explanation for why the Dow Jones industrial average and Standard & Poor’s 500-stock index hit a new high on Monday despite geopolitical tensions, turmoil in the White House and the threat of higher interest rates: Boeing. While investors have been piling into high-tech growth stocks, the giant commercial aircraft manufacturer and defense contractor has quietly emerged as the best-performing stock in the Dow. This week its shares rose above $240, and even after falling back with the broader market on Thursday, they’ve gained 50 percent this year. That’s way ahead of second-place Apple, which is up about 34 percent. And it’s better than Netflix, not a Dow component, which is up 37 percent. Facebook and Alphabet, Google’s parent, can’t match it, either. When it comes to valuation, there’s only one thing stock investors really care about, which is earnings. And the broad economic forces driving Boeing’s gains are lifting the earnings at many large multinational companies, which is in turn driving the major stock indexes to new heights. Boeing had Wall Street analysts scrambling to upgrade their recommendations late last month after it reported $2.5 billion in earnings for the second quarter and raised estimates for future earnings and cash flow. The company reported an order backlog that totaled 5,700 aircraft , or about seven full years of deliveries. That will lock in profits and cash flow for years to come. Seth Seifman, a J.P. Morgan analyst, called the quarter a “watershed.” Dennis Muilenburg, a Boeing veteran who took over as chief executive in 2015, is reaping praise for increasing profit margins and improving tense labor relations. But in many ways, the company is simply cashing in on the same dynamics that are driving earnings — and stock prices — of many of the biggest components of the market indexes. Here are the key elements. Global Growth “Boeing definitely represents one of the big multinational companies that is benefiting from global economic growth,” said Michael Arone, a managing director and investment strategist at State Street Global Advisors. “We’re having a more global, synchronized recovery.” He noted that Europe had outpaced the United States in economic growth this year, and that earnings at S.&P. 500 companies had shown double-digit growth for the first time in six years. In emerging markets like India and China, rising incomes are driving demand for leisure travel. “Global travel demand is rising much faster than its historical norm,” said Richard L. Aboulafia, a longtime aviation and aerospace analyst at the Teal Group. In Boeing’s earnings conference call last month, Mr. Muilenburg noted that air passenger traffic had outpaced global economic growth this year, and that air cargo traffic was up a solid 10 percent for the first five months of the year. Demand for Boeing products “is more geographically diverse and balanced across the globe,” he said. Cost Cutting Few companies have proved more adept than Boeing at managing costs, something it had done in part through expanding operations in nonunion South Carolina and establishing what it calls “partnerships” with suppliers. (Boeing workers in South Carolina rejected a union organizing effort in February.) “They’ve done a great job on costs, crunching suppliers and labor while simultaneously increasing revenue,” Mr. Aboulafia said. “That’s impressive.” This is especially true of the once-troubled 787 Dreamliner, whose delays, cost overruns and other problems now seem behind it. Mr. Seifman’s report said the 787’s performance had exceeded “even the more bullish estimates.” But Boeing isn’t alone. “At a time of sluggish growth in the economy and top-line revenue growth, companies have been very adept at managing costs and maintaining margins,” Mr. Arone said. Image The Boeing logo at a trading post on the floor of the New York Stock Exchange. Boeing is benefiting from, among other things, global economic growth. Credit Richard Drew/Associated Press That, of course, is one reason that higher corporate profits have been so slow to trickle down to the rank and file and that wage growth has been so stubbornly low. The biggest beneficiaries have been shareholders. Boeing increased its share buyback program to $10 billion this year and raised its dividend by 30 percent. Low Interest Rates “Boeing is a huge beneficiary of low interest rates,” said Mr. Aboulafia, especially when fuel prices are high. Customers “have every incentive to replace aging planes with more fuel-efficient versions.” And the purchase of an aircraft is a large capital investment typically financed by borrowing. “That’s true of many large manufacturers,” Mr. Arone said, which is why large-capitalization stocks have done better this year than their small-cap counterparts, which typically don’t make products that require large capital expenditures. Low interest rates also mean that investors seeking income have few alternatives to stocks. That’s driven all the indexes higher. The White House As with many companies with global markets, Boeing’s future was clouded by President Trump’s vow to renegotiate trade deals and risk a trade war. He threatened to kill the Export-Import Bank, such a major lender to Boeing customers that it’s sometimes called “Boeing’s Bank.” After he took aim at Boeing in a series of tweets last December, threatening to cancel a contract to replace the aging Air Force One, it was a “heart attack moment” for Boeing shareholders, Mr. Aboulafia said. Six months and one charm offensive later, Mr. Trump is singing Boeing’s praises. In February he posed in front of a newly minted 787 Dreamliner at Boeing’s sprawling manufacturing plant in North Charleston, S.C., saying he was there “ to celebrate jobs .” He added, “God bless Boeing.” “You should have seen the Boeing executives fawning over Trump in South Carolina,” Mr. Aboulafia said. “They basically pursued a campaign of radical sycophancy, and it’s paid off handsomely.” While in South Carolina, the president promised a big order of Boeing Super Hornet fighter jets, and in May, the federal government followed through with $1.1 billion in this year’s budget for 14 of the planes. In April he pledged not only to maintain the Export-Import Bank, but also to revive it. Even the president’s threat to renew sanctions on Iran has had minimal, if any, effect on Boeing. Iran has placed two big orders for more than $20 billion in new commercial aircraft. The Road Ahead To what degree the president deserves credit for the rise in stock prices remains a subject of debate, but so far, he has been far more market-friendly than his campaign pronouncements suggested. “There’s been a lot of tough talk, but not much follow-through on the issues investors care about most,” like immigration and trade, Mr. Arone said. And investors are still hoping for tax reform and a cut in the corporate tax rate. Last year Boeing paid $1.2 billion in federal tax, an effective rate of 23 percent. Can all of this continue, given increasingly high valuations and an aging bull market? “That’s the dilemma,” Mr. Arone said. Boeing, for example, isn’t exactly cheap at nearly $240 a share, and its price-to-earnings ratio for the trailing 12 months is pushing 30, far above the market average. Cost cutting can only go so far. That hasn’t stopped the analysts from raising their target prices on Boeing: to $300 (Cowen & Company), $280 (J.P. Morgan) and $275 (Bank of America Merrill Lynch). As for other large multinationals and the broader market indexes, Mr. Arone sees no immediate threat to further gains. None of the warning signs he looks for — more-frequent market corrections, higher interest rates and widening credit spreads — have yet materialized. “None is flashing red,” he said. “Not even yellow.” While conceding the bull market “is getting long in the tooth,” he said, “Bull markets don’t die of old age.” A version of this article appears in print on , on Page B 1 of the New York edition with the headline: A Year of New Heights For the Dow, Led by Boeing . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Related Coverage Iran May Get First New Boeing Jetliner a Year Ahead of Time April 10, 2017 Image Trump Talk Rattles Aerospace Industry, Up and Down Supply Chain Feb. 23, 2017 Image Tech, Fed, Trump: So Many Reasons to Worry About the Market June 29, 2017 Image Buy? Sell? Politics May Move the Market, but Rarely for Long May 25, 2017 Image Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              