   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Politics Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Many G.O.P. Blunders Put Seat at Risk, Even Before Scandal Image A campaign rally for Roy Moore on the eve of the special Senate election in Alabama. Credit Audra Melton for The New York Times By  Alexander Burns Dec. 12, 2017 MOUNTAIN BROOK, Ala. — For Republicans, it did not have to come to this. After a fraught campaign that tested the country’s tolerance for political sideshows, Roy S. Moore , the party’s Senate nominee, lost to the Democrat Doug Jones in a special election on Tuesday . Even before the race, Republican leaders in Alabama and Washington had taken to describing Mr. Moore as a kind of biblical plague — a punishing force inflicted on them, and outside their control. But for all his local fame and notoriety, Mr. Moore was never an inevitability in the Senate race. Nor was it inevitable that Alabama would hold a Senate election this year at all, let alone one that the Democrats would win. To grasp the sheer improbability of the election unfolding here, consider the improbable — and improbably ill-fated — decisions Republican leaders made to bring things to this point. Choice No. 1: The Vacancy It began with President Trump’s selection of Jeff Sessions to serve as his attorney general — a favor to a fierce political ally, whom Mr. Trump soon turned against. By naming Mr. Sessions, the president ensured, at the very least, that there would be a raucous Republican primary in a turbulent red state. Had Mr. Trump named a non-senator to the job, no such election would have taken place. Choice No. 2: The Appointment When Mr. Sessions abandoned the Senate, it fell to Robert Bentley, Alabama’s embattled governor, to pick a replacement. He had myriad options, with state legislators and members of Congress begging for the job. Senator Mitch McConnell, the majority leader, lobbied Mr. Bentley to consider naming a woman to the seat. But Mr. Bentley went a different route, choosing Luther Strange, the state attorney general — who was at the time investigating Mr. Bentley. The appointment was seen as tainted from the start. Mr. Strange, however, believed he would have time to settle into the seat before defending it in a 2018 special election. Choice No. 3: The Date Mr. Bentley helped set this process in motion, but he left office before he could see it through. After he resigned in a deal with prosecutors, his successor, Kay Ivey, surprised national Republicans by rescheduling the special election. She moved it from November 2018 to a random Tuesday in December of this year, amputating half of Mr. Strange’s borrowed term and forcing an early reckoning for the unpopular appointee. Choice No. 4: The Primary If Mr. Strange was viewed uneasily in Alabama, he was fully embraced in Washington. Mr. McConnell backed him forcefully in his bid for a full term, and committed millions through a “super PAC” to aiding his candidacy. But in defending Mr. Strange from his Republican rivals, Mr. McConnell’s allies chose not to attack Mr. Moore, believing Mr. Strange could defeat him in a one-on-one race. Instead, they made devastating attacks on Representative Mo Brooks, an arch-conservative lawmaker whom they viewed as a Senate gadfly in the making. Mr. Brooks’s campaign crumbled — and the bulk of his support migrated to Mr. Moore, helping him trounce Mr. Strange in a September runoff election. Mr. Trump, meanwhile, was an inconsistent ally of Mr. Strange, endorsing him on Twitter and holding a campaign event to rally support, but also musing publicly at that rally about whether he had erred in his endorsement. The event may have done more harm than good. Choice No. 5: The Nominee With the Republican nomination in hand, Mr. Moore presented Republican leaders with a searing and seemingly binary choice: Embrace a man they saw as a loathsome extremist, in the hope of saving a Senate seat, or shun him and write off the election as a loss to Doug Jones, the Democrat. They chose, instead, a worst-of-both-worlds middle path, nominally endorsing Mr. Moore but closing their checkbooks to him, and leaving him to fend for himself in the race. That approach was just distant to enough to leave Mr. Moore gasping — unable to raise money to answer Mr. Jones’s television commercials — and just supportive enough so that when Mr. Moore found himself facing multiple allegations of improper sexual behavior or unwanted advances with teenage girls, party leaders had to answer for Mr. Moore. Had any one of a number of Republicans made any one of those choices differently — from creating the initial vacancy to halfheartedly accepting Mr. Moore in September — the party might not be staring at the possibility of electoral humiliation in the Deep South. The outlandish political circumstances are not lost on people here: At a rally for Mr. Jones on Monday night, the basketball star Charles Barkley marveled at the sheer bizarreness of the race, voicing disbelief that Mr. Moore might still win. “If somebody sent you this as a movie script,” he said, “you’d throw it in the trash.” Related Coverage With Alabama Senate Race Defined by Scandal, Policy Issues Are Overlooked Dec. 9, 2017 Image Alabama Senate Race, Unlikely Nail-Biter, Races to Finish Line Dec. 11, 2017 Image Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              