   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Business Day Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Mediator Russia Inquiry Fails to Unite a Nation Image Representatives from Facebook, Twitter and Google appeared before Congress on Tuesday to provide details about how Russian operatives had reached millions of Americans with divisive messages. Credit Eric Thayer for The New York Times By  Jim Rutenberg Oct. 31, 2017 On Valentine’s Day in 2001, the heads of the major television news networks went to Capitol Hill to answer hard questions about the poor job they had done on Election Day. In a buck-stops-with-us moment, they were resolute about doing better. And they were contrite — even the Fox News founder and chief executive, Roger Ailes, a famous bully who rarely shied from a fight. “We let our viewers down,” Mr. Ailes said. “It will not happen again.” The networks were on the hot seat because their election-night coverage had contributed to the chaos of that shambolic evening. They declared Al Gore the winner in Florida before all of the state’s polls were closed — and then they called it for George W. Bush, although the results remained in doubt for weeks. In the months that followed, the news organizations agreed on the basic facts, if not on every detail. And under bipartisan pressure from Congress, they moved swiftly to fix their flawed election-night projection system. Look at us now. As the country grapples with a still more serious affront to American democracy, the agreement on the basic facts in the mainstream news media does not extend to Rupert Murdoch’s media empire and other important parts of the conservative media. This is the case even as the special counsel Robert S. Mueller III bears down in his investigation of the alleged Russian efforts to sway the 2016 presidential election. As Mr. Mueller and his team home in on people connected to President Trump, including his former campaign manager Paul Manafort, the president and his allies in the conservative media sphere are pointing at the Democrats and Hillary Clinton. Adding to the problem is the recent behavior of the tech companies, which have not shown the same desire for accountability exhibited by Mr. Ailes and his fellow network chiefs all those years ago. On Tuesday, when Congress called Facebook, Twitter and Google to testify , the platforms sent their lawyers , not their top bosses. Yes, the lawyers provided some details about how Russian operatives had reached scores of millions of Americans with divisive and misleading messages. But that was only after Facebook’s founder, Mark Zuckerberg, insisted in November that it was a “pretty crazy idea” that Russian operatives had used Facebook to influence the election. (Facebook’s latest tally of Americans who were exposed to Russia’s divisive content: 126 million.) The opacity of the tech companies was matched by the efforts of some conservative media outlets to confuse and distract. In the days leading up to the indictment of Mr. Manafort and his lobbying partner Rick Gates, they saw fit to question Mr. Mueller’s legitimacy. They did so while arguing that the real focus should be on Mrs. Clinton, the Democrats and a political research firm that commissioned the gathering of information on Mr. Trump’s ties to Russia, Fusion GPS. The counternarrative was particularly pronounced in the outlets controlled by Mr. Murdoch — who has close ties to the president’s family — and his news and entertainment companies, 21st Century Fox and News Corp. On Saturday, the Fox News host Jeanine Pirro called for the jailing of Mrs. Clinton, saying, “It’s time to shut it down, turn the tables and lock her up.” She alleged that “the Obamas and the Clintons” had “built the Trump-Russia connection,” pointing to a report in The Washington Post that the Clinton campaign and Democratic National Committee had helped finance research by Fusion GPS, which produced a dossier describing ties between the Trump campaign and the Russian government. She did not mention a report in The New York Times that a conservative media organization , The Free Beacon, hired Fusion GPS to research Mr. Trump and other Republicans. The most salacious findings in the dossier , based on information collected from sources inside and outside the Kremlin by a Fusion GPS contractor, the former British intelligence officer Christopher Steele, remain uncorroborated. Also on Saturday, The New York Post columnist Michael Goodwin called for Mr. Mueller’s resignation, citing Fusion GPS as well as Mr. Mueller’s previous job as an F.B.I. director under President Barack Obama, given that, in Mr. Goodwin’s view, so much of the investigative focus must now fall on Mr. Obama’s administration. Foreshadowing Mr. Goodwin’s dubious argument was an editorial in the Murdoch-owned Wall Street Journal, which declared that Mr. Mueller “lacks the critical distance” to look into the allegation that “Democrats paid for Russians to compile wild allegations about a U.S. presidential candidate.” The editorial also questioned whether the dossier had triggered the F.B.I. inquiry into Mr. Trump’s campaign. But the investigation began in July last year, James B. Comey, the F.B.I. director at the time, told Congress in March, not long after Fusion GPS’s financing passed from Republican to Democratic sources. And while skepticism is a virtue in all journalistic endeavors, there is no evidence to support the assertion that the Democrats hired Fusion GPS with the purpose of getting Russians to spread “wild allegations” about Mr. Trump. As John Sipher, a former Central Intelligence Agency chief of station, pointed out, intelligence tends to come from sources within foreign governments. “Reaching out to Russians and Americans to try to collect information on what might have happened and then pass that information to sources in good faith, that’s different from trying to conspire with Russia to get stolen emails from the United States,” Mr. Sipher told me. The collective coverage from The Journal editorial page, The New York Post and Fox News — not including the straight-ahead coverage by the likes of Shepard Smith and Bret Baier — was testament to the Murdoch empire’s ability to make its own journalistic weather. Between the promotion of alternative narratives and the way the social media platforms have been so slow in describing their inadvertent hosting of the Russian effort, there’s a striking lack of national unity over what appears to have been a foreign incursion in an American election. So you have to wonder how the country will ever come together to do something about it. “There’s this epic lack of consensus, or active dis-census,” said Shawn Powers, the executive director of the United States Advisory Commission on Public Diplomacy, who has spent years studying what he calls the “geopolitics of information.” Mr. Powers was confident that, as the facts come out, the country will find a way to fend off similar attacks. For instance, he said, Facebook, Twitter and Google are adding new policies to combat false information, fake accounts and nefarious foreign political advertising. But I can’t help thinking back to 2001. On Tuesday, I called Tom Johnson, the former CNN chairman, who was one of the executives who appeared on Capitol Hill to testify in 2001. He said some colleagues had some qualms appearing before Congress, given the First Amendment implications. But he told me that he had felt it was the right thing to do. “I still think we have the very highest public responsibility to make sure we get it right and, when we don’t get it right, that we try to determine what went wrong and what we can do about it,” he said. “It really gets down to operating in the public interest.” Oh, yeah, that. Jaclyn Peiser contributed reporting  A version of this article appears in print on , on Page A 14 of the New York edition with the headline: Closing Ranks, Murdoch Empire Sows Doubts on Russia Inquiry . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Related Coverage Russian Influence Reached 126 Million Through Facebook Alone Oct. 30, 2017 Image Meet the People Who Will Defend Google, Facebook and Twitter Before Lawmakers Oct. 20, 2017 Image Conservative Website First Funded Anti-Trump Research by Firm That Later Produced Dossier Oct. 27, 2017 Image Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              