   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Book Review Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by By the Book James B. Comey: By the Book April 12, 2018 Image James B. Comey Credit Illustration by Jillian Tamaki When James B. Comey, the former F.B.I. director and author of “A Higher Loyalty,” reads fiction, it’s “almost always something my kids are reading, so I can … pretend to be cool.” What books are on your nightstand? “ Grant ,” by Ron Chernow (actual nightstand); “The Last Lion: Winston Spencer Churchill, Defender of the Realm 1940-1965,” by William Manchester and Paul Reid (living room table). When and where do you like to read? In bed and in the living room. What was the last truly great book you read? “Why the West Rules — for Now,” by Ian Morris, a sweeping look at the patterns of human history and a glimpse at the future. What books would we be surprised to find on your shelf? “The Fault in Our Stars,” by John Green; the “Mistborn” series, by Brandon Sanderson; and the “Red Rising” series, by Pierce Brown. What kind of reader were you as a child? Any favorites from that time, or books you return to again and again? The first real book I remember reading on my own was “The Swamp Fox of the Revolution,” by Stewart H. Holbrook, about Francis Marion. I read it multiple times, and I’m not sure why. In a strange twist, it was also one of my wife’s favorites, growing up in Iowa at the same time as I was in Yonkers. In high school, I got deeply into Tolkien’s books and also loved “Five Smooth Stones,” by Ann Fairbairn, about an interracial relationship and the African-American struggle for civil rights. I liked those books so much I would try to read slowly to make them last longer. [ ALSO READ : James Comey Has a Story to Tell. It’s Very Persuasive ] What books over the years have most influenced your thinking? Reinhold Niebuhr’s “Moral Man and Immoral Society” and “The Nature and Destiny of Man” had a huge impact on me, as did Strunk and White’s “The Elements of Style,” which was one of 12 books in my college course “Significant Books in Western Religion.” The professor believed that all ideas are wasted that can’t be clearly expressed. King’s “ Letter From Birmingham Jail ” was also one of the 12 books and is the only book I’ve read repeatedly as an adult. More recently, I was really struck by Jonathan Haidt’s “The Righteous Mind: Why Good People Are Divided by Politics and Religion.” Which genres are you drawn to and which do you avoid? I read mostly nonfiction, with heavy emphasis on biography and social psychology. If I read fiction, it is almost always something my kids are reading, so I can understand what they are reading and also pretend to be cool. Can you recommend any thrillers or other works of fiction that get law enforcement particularly right? “Red Sparrow” and its sequel, “Palace of Treason,” by Jason Matthews, nail the world of intelligence and counterintelligence (and offer a cleareyed view of modern Russia). Because crime and terrorism filled so many of my work days, I tended to avoid books about those subjects, so I don’t know of a book that gets those right. But Scott Turow gets the world of prosecution and trials right in his work, especially the classic “Presumed Innocent.” If you could require the president to read one book, what would it be? The United States Constitution isn’t a book, so I would pick “The Road to Character,” by David Brooks. Do you have a favorite literary character or hero? Atticus Finch. Disappointing, overrated, just not good: What book did you feel as if you were supposed to like, and didn’t? I’m told no sensible author answers this one. You’re organizing a literary dinner party. Which three writers, dead or alive, do you invite? I read “Lean In,” by Sheryl Sandberg, when I was the F.B.I. director and recommended it to the workforce, so Ms. Sandberg would be invited. And if she doesn’t mind eating with dead people, I’d also have Reinhold Niebuhr and Martin Luther King Jr. Both were remarkable observers of human nature and America. It would be really interesting to pick their brains about current events. [ ALSO READ : Comey’s Memoir Offers Visceral Details on a President ‘Untethered to Truth’ ] How do you like to read? Paper or electronic? One book at a time or several simultaneously? Morning or night? I like to read paper books. I have tried reading on electronic devices but I need to feel the pages. I am always reading at least two books, one for upstairs and one for downstairs. Until I got fired, I read only on long flights because there was too much work stuff to read at home. Now that I’m underemployed, I read mostly at night, but sometimes during the day. Never in the morning. Wrong chronotype. What books did you look to as inspiration or models while you were writing your own? Honestly none, because I was trying to do something unusual — write a book that was neither a pure leadership book nor a pure memoir. I wanted it to be a story-driven book that teaches in a subtle way. We’ll see if it worked. If somebody walked into your office while you were writing, what would they see? I’m in an armchair with the laptop on my actual lap but atop one of those “read-in-bed” boards to make a better angle for typing. Our loyal, and old, rescue-dog, Benji, is asleep somewhere near my chair. I’m listening to classical music. If you had to recommend one book to a student of government, what would it be? “The Terror Presidency,” by Jack Goldsmith. Whom would you want to write your life story? Benjamin Weiser of The New York Times is the most careful and thoughtful journalist I have known and I loved his biography of the Polish defector Ryszard Kuklinski — “A Secret Life: The Polish Officer, His Covert Mission, and the Price He Paid to Save His Country.” What do you plan to read next? “Trust,” by Francis Fukuyama, about how bonds within a society are made and broken. I started it last year and it has become only more relevant so I need to get back to it.  Follow New York Times Books on Facebook and Twitter , sign up for our newsletter or our literary calendar . And listen to us on the Book Review podcast . A version of this article appears in print on , on Page 7 of the Sunday Book Review with the headline: James B. Comey . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              