   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Politics Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Supreme Court Nomination Drives Groups From Left and Right to Fight Image President Obama with Judge Merrick B. Garland in the Rose Garden of the White House on Wednesday. Mr. Obama said he would nominate Judge Garland as the nation’s next Supreme Court justice. Credit Stephen Crowley/The New York Times By  Eric Lipton March 16, 2016 WASHINGTON — More than 100 protest rallies are being scheduled in key electoral states like Ohio, Pennsylvania, Illinois, Wisconsin, New Hampshire and Iowa. Television advertisements are being scripted. Twitter and Facebook campaigns are rolling out, and email blasts are filling up inboxes. With the nomination of Merrick B. Garland on Wednesday by President Obama to fill the vacancy on the Supreme Court left by the death of Justice Antonin Scalia, advocacy groups from the left and the right are now fully engaged in what both sides agree will be a highly contentious Supreme Court nomination fight — even if Mr. Garland never gets so much as a Senate Judiciary Committee hearing. “Bork and Thomas, those were titanic battles,” said Curt A. Levey, the executive director of FreedomWorks Foundation, a conservative group, referring to the Supreme Court nomination fights over Robert H. Bork in 1987 and Clarence Thomas in 1991. “I think this will be the biggest battle of all. ” As one measure of the scale of the fight, several former top aides to Mr. Obama, including Stephanie Cutter, Katie Beirne Fallon and Anita Dunn, are joining to create a nonprofit group they will call Constitutional Responsibility Project to coordinate the campaign by liberal groups and perhaps buy television ads. There were already signs Wednesday that the nomination has become a fund-raising tool . The House Majority PAC, which supports Democrats, sent out a solicitation urging recipients to contribute money “to help us support President Obama’s Supreme Court nominee.” FreedomWorks, meanwhile, is making its own fund-raising pitch, saying “we cannot allow another liberal on the Supreme Court.” The White House on Wednesday declined to say whether the White House would coordinate with the groups to push for Judge Garland. Part of the intensity of the effort on both sides is a reflection of the diverse range of special interest groups that have decided to engage in what will be the first confirmation fight in an age in which social media has become a dominant force. In many cases, the groups have set aside longstanding tensions that have prevented them from teaming up in a unified way. On the right, conservative groups like Heritage Action, which have in the past sparred with Senator Mitch McConnell, the Kentucky Republican and majority leader, are already working closely with his office to back up his call that the Senate should wait until the next president is sworn in to fill the court vacancy. Judge Garland was approved by the Senate to the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit in a 76-to-23 vote in 1997. Raising Money to Support Democrats in the Supreme Court Fight The House Majority PAC, which supports Democrats, sent out a solicitation urging recipients to contribute money “to help us support President Obama’s Supreme Court nominee.” March 17, 2016 “It is different than a lot of the fights over the last five or six years,” said Dan Holler, a Heritage Action spokesman. “The unity on the right is pretty remarkable and encouraging.” On the left, environmental, gay rights, women’s rights and civil rights groups, as well as labor unions and grass-roots organizers like Credo and MoveOn.org have teamed up. With regular conference calls and meetings organized by top former Obama aides and consulting firms, they are preparing to blast a single message to the Senate nationwide: #DoYourJob . “There is an incredibly diverse and deep coalition of organizations that have left their institutional egos at the door and have come together for the purpose of advancing a unified goal,” said Wade Henderson, the president of the liberal Leadership Conference on Civil and Human Rights, whose civil rights organization hosted leaders from 30 to 40 groups at its offices last Friday. Liberal groups see their push as a win-win: If the Senate Republicans decline to hold hearings or vote on Judge Garland, they are convinced the protests they are busy organizing will help Democrats pick up at least some Senate seats. Video Mitch McConnell, the Senate majority leader, said he stood by his original position of withholding consideration of any nominee the president puts forward. Published On March 16, 2016 “If we apply enough political pressure, McConnell will see the majority slipping out of his hands and he will relent,” said Brad Woodhouse, president of the progressive advocacy group Americans United for Change. “If not, we are still going to extract a political price and we will just do this all next year with President Clinton.” Many of the liberal events, at least according to the plan, are going to feature speakers like construction workers or nurses — to emphasize the “Do your job” theme. On the right, there is a similar sense that a high-profile nomination fight will motivate their core supporters — which is why a broad range of conservative causes, from the Federalist Society, a legal group; Americans United for Life, an anti-abortion group; and Gun Owners of America are prepared to invest so much effort in this debate. “We want to make sure that people recognize what is at stake — when it comes to issues like the death penalty, gun rights and immigration,” said Carrie Severino of Judicial Crisis Network. She said her group intended to spend up to $2 million and to target Democratic senators from more conservative states, like Joe Donnelly of Indiana, Joe Manchin III of West Virginia and Michael Bennet of Colorado, who is up for re-election in 2016. Why Obama Nominated Merrick Garland for the Supreme Court Merrick B. Garland is a candidate who had support from Republicans in the past but would still move the court in a progressive direction. March 16, 2016 The first part of the push will focus on senators back in their home states during the recess that starts next week. MoveOn.org plans a “National Day of Action,” which organizers say will involve more than 50 rallies on Monday alone, mostly in states where Senate Republicans are up for re-election. Conservatives plan their own events during the recess, although the details are still being worked out. Republicans are likely to focus the debate on the process while Democrats will try to highlight the personal story of Judge Garland. Mr. Obama’s decision to select Judge Garland, a white man, has, at least among some liberal activists, deflated their enthusiasm for the fight. “President Obama failed to use this opportunity to add the voice of another progressive woman of color to the Supreme Court,” Charles Chamberlain, the executive director of Democracy for America, said in a statement. But Mr. Henderson, who is black and runs a civil-rights group, played down this split, saying President Obama had already appointed a record number of women and minorities as federal judges. The U.S. Chamber of Commerce and the National Association of Manufacturers, so far at least, plan not to play an active role in the fight. But there will still be some major industry groups involved, like the National Federation of Independent Business, which for the first time in its 73-year history has decided to mobilize, citing several continuing cases that its leaders fear could “radically expand the federal government’s control over the economy,” including a court fight over pending clean air and clean water environmental rules. Groups on both sides will try to enlist prominent business leaders, a strategy that liberal groups have started to roll out, including a letter signed by dozens of corporate lawyers urging the Senate to act on the nomination, as well as a separate one signed by  constitutional  law scholars . A “coordinated validator push” is what Amy Brundage, a former Obama White House deputy communications director, called it. She is now at SKDKnickerbocker, a political consulting firm that is helping with the Supreme Court push. R. Bruce Josten, the top lobbyist at the Chamber of Commerce, said that to him, the biggest challenge for both sides was going to be keeping the American public interested in the debate if the Senate holds no hearings and takes no votes. “They are going to have manufactured something to continue to cause stories to be written,” he said. “That is a tall order.” Gardiner Harris contributed reporting.  Follow The New York Times’s politics and Washington coverage on Facebook and Twitter , and sign up for the First Draft politics newsletter . A version of this article appears in print on , on Page A 14 of the New York edition with the headline: With Ads, Rallies and Email Blasts, Interest Groups Join Fray Over Nomination . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Related Coverage Obama Chooses Merrick Garland for Supreme Court March 16, 2016 Image Supreme Court Showdown Could Shape Fall Elections March 16, 2016 Image A Supreme Court Seat Sits Empty, and Calls to Fill It Dog Republicans March 14, 2016 Image Mitch McConnell Bets That Impasse on Court Now Helps G.O.P. Later March 7, 2016 Image Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              