   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index U.S. Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by California Today California Today: What to Look for on Election Day Image Construction cranes loomed over Hollywood Boulevard in Los Angeles. Credit Monica Almeida/The New York Times By  Mike McPhate March 6, 2017 Good morning. (Want to get California Today by email? Here’s the sign-up .) Let’s turn it over to Adam Nagourney , our Los Angeles bureau chief , for today’s introduction. LOS ANGELES — It’s Election Day (again) on Tuesday in California, and while there are no particularly competitive races for office, two voter initiatives are potentially big enough to overshadow the sleepy re-election bid of Mayor Eric M. Garcetti. The first, Measure S , would impose a two-year moratorium on some new construction in the city of Los Angeles. It has created a fierce — and well-financed battle — that has rekindled old debates about what Los Angeles should look like and the influence developers enjoy with elected officials. Southern California is going through a building boom, and the city has approved a series of dense and tall projects over the ire of some neighborhood groups upset not only with what they see as overdevelopment, but also the influence of deep-pocketed special interests at City Hall. They argue a two-year moratorium will force Los Angeles to adopt uniform zoning plans to guide how neighborhoods should handle developments. Opponents — including Mr. Garcetti and labor unions — warn it would be damaging to the economy and throttle any effort to build desperately needed affordable housing here. Both arguments have been played out in television advertisements and billboards across town. Mr. Garcetti has campaigned nearly as hard against the measure as he has for his own re-election. One side note here: Mr. Garcetti, who faces 10 little-known opponents, needs to win 50 percent of the vote to avoid a runoff. Low turnout races can be dicey, especially with an initiative that could bring out people upset with the direction Los Angeles is taking under Mr. Garcetti. The second measure worth watching is a Los Angeles countywide sales tax increase to pay for services for the homeless. This follows a vote by Los Angeles city voters last year to finance $1.2 billion in bonds to build housing for the homeless. Both measures would require a two-thirds vote by the electorate. Considering how much money will be released should this pass, Los Angeles could offer a test in the years ahead of a key question: Can government spend its way out homelessness? California Online (Please note: We regularly highlight articles on news sites that have limited access for nonsubscribers.) • A former mayor of Stockton was arrested. He was booked on felony charges including embezzlement and money laundering. [ The Record ] • Census data showed that as wealthier Americans migrate to California, the state’s poorer residents are leaving — often for Texas . [ Sacramento Bee ] Image Supporters of President Trump clashed with counter-protesters in Berkeley on Saturday. Credit Jim Wilson/The New York Times • A pro-Trump rally was confronted by counter-protesters in Berkeley over the weekend. It got ugly. [ Berkeleyside ] • An Afghan family of five, visas in hand, was detained when it arrived in Los Angeles. [ The New York Times ] • He dropped off his daughter at her school. Immigration agents arrested him moments later. [ The New York Times ] • Santa Ana has set an example that other cities of immigrants should follow. [ Opinion | The New York Times ] • Snap’s investors are betting on the kind of rapid growth that few, if any, companies have ever achieved, writes James B. Stewart. [ The New York Times ] Image Ernesto Escobedo, 20, is the first Mexican-American man to break into the top 200 since the 1960s. Credit Ruth Fremson/The New York Times • Nurtured on the public courts of Southern California, Ernesto Escobedo is blazing a tennis trail similar to the Williams sisters’. [ The New York Times ] • A company is extracting huge amounts of sand from Monterey Bay . The work has been linked to severe erosion of the shoreline. [ San Francisco Chronicle ] • After years of drought, hydropower is poised for a comeback in California. [ San Diego Union-Tribune ] • Video: A drone captured the major sewage spill that has polluted Imperial Beach. [ Zach Wick | YouTube ] • Al Pacino stars in a play by Dotson Rader at the Pasadena Playhouse. Here is why it falls short. [ Opinion | Los Angeles Times ] Image The midcentury home of J.R. Roberts, a city councilman in Palm Springs. Credit Emily Berl for The New York Times • You can blame “Mad Men” and Coachella for the resurgence of Palm Springs . [ The New York Times ] Coming Up This Week • Madeleine Albright, the former secretary of state, will speak Wednesday in San Francisco. The topic: “challenges confronting America.” • The BNP Paribas Open in Indian Wells kicks off today. Roger Federer will return after being absent in 2016. Serena Williams will seek her third title. • “ Jim Marshall’s 1967 ,” a photography exhibition celebrating the 50th anniversary of San Francisco’s Summer of Love, opens Friday at the Grammy Museum. It runs through May 14. • Dana Point’s 46th annual Festival of Whales will have events on Saturday and Sunday. There will be a children’s fair, a clam chowder cook off and whale watching. And Finally ... Image Cycling in San Francisco. Credit Jason Henry for The New York Times We want to get more of your voices in California Today. To that end, a new plan: Each Monday, we’ll come up with a question for you, solicit responses, then feature a handful by the end of the week. Here is one to kick things off. Two state lawmakers have introduced a measure that would allow bicyclists to treat stop signs like yield signs — rolling through them slowly and stopping only if necessary. It sounds dangerous. But some bicycle groups argue that cyclists are in fact safer when they are allowed to move more freely. That’s because they spend less time in intersections, where the risk of a collision is greater. Research  has shown that a similar law enacted in Idaho resulted in fewer crashes. Opponents of the change argue that it would invite confusion about the rules of the road and possibly encourage (more) bad behavior among cyclists. What do you think? Should cyclists be allowed to roll through stop signs? Tell us, and please include your full name and city of residence: CAtoday@nytimes.com . California Today goes live at 6 a.m. Pacific time weekdays. The California Today columnist, Mike McPhate, is a third-generation Californian — born outside Sacramento and raised in San Juan Capistrano. He lives in Davis. Follow him on Twitter . California Today is edited by Julie Bloom, who grew up in Los Angeles and attended U.C. Berkeley. Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              