   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Climate Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Climate Fwd: Taking a Leaf Out of Thoreau’s Book By  Brad Plumer and John Schwartz April 11, 2018 Welcome to the Climate Fwd: newsletter. The New York Times climate team emails readers once a week with stories and insights about climate change. Sign up here to get it in your inbox. This week, we’ll have a quick E.P.A. update for you, we’ll look at a surprising contribution to climate science from the 19th century, and we’ll bring you up to speed on newly released Shell documents. The latest on Pruitt and the E.P.A. In last week’s newsletter we summed up why Scott Pruitt, chief of the Environmental Protection Agency, was under fire. (It’s a lot to absorb: ethics scandals over travel, housing, security and staff moves.) Despite the imbroglio, Mr. Pruitt, who has been on a roll in rolling back Obama-era regulations, ostensibly remains in favor with President Trump. A few updates since last week: One of Mr. Pruitt’s top advisers, Samantha Dravis, resigned . An internal E.P.A. assessment, obtained by two senators, said the justifications for extra security spending that were provided by Mr. Pruitt’s security team didn’t hold up . We also published a story about how several E.P.A. officials who raised concerns about Mr. Pruitt’s spending have been reassigned or demoted, or requested new jobs. And another story about how Mr. Pruitt’s regulatory rollbacks, some of which have been hastily implemented, may not hold up in court. Mr. Trump’s chief of staff, John F. Kelly, advised him to fire Mr. Pruitt , according to two officials. But Mr. Trump later tweeted : “Scott is doing a great job!” Climate data that transcends time Image Specimens from Henry David Thoreau’s herbarium. Credit Harvard University Herbaria By  Brad Plumer As our planet warms up, the seasons are shifting in many parts of the world. Spring often arrives earlier, autumn often comes later. And not all species are adjusting their own seasonal habits at the same rate. Some flowers are now blooming before their pollinators emerge. Some birds are arriving at their breeding grounds after the insects they normally feast on have peaked. When different species fall out of sync like this, scientists call it a phenological mismatch. And, as Livia Albeck-Ripka and I reported last week, researchers have already found a few troubling examples where mismatches are having negative consequences for birds and animals, from the pied flycatcher in Europe to the caribou in western Greenland. Yet this research is still relatively new, and one thing scientists told us is that these mismatches can be incredibly difficult to document. Take birds: First you need decades of data on when birds migrate each year and how that timing has shifted as temperatures have risen. Then, you need to do the same thing with the insects they eat. After that, you need to figure out if the birds are actually going hungry as a result of a mismatch. It’s painstaking detective work. So researchers often have to get creative in assembling detailed historical records for different species. One of our favorite examples of this is from Concord, Mass., where two scientists have been using the notebooks of Henry David Thoreau to document major shifts in the region. Image Credit Harvard University Herbaria Starting in 1851, Thoreau began keeping detailed records of springtime, noting when certain flowers first appeared, when certain trees leafed out, when migratory birds arrived. Dozens of naturalists carried on Thoreau’s work after he died, making Concord one of the best-studied ecosystems around. In 2003, Richard B. Primack and Abraham J. Miller-Rushing, then of Boston University, realized they could use these records to see how the timing of these flowers and trees had changed over the decades as the climate shifted. They found, for instance, that flowers bloomed earlier during warmer springs. But migratory birds, which often take their cues to fly north from the length of the day in their wintering grounds, were not adjusting their migrations accordingly. “That was an indication that there might be an ecological mismatch,” said Dr. Primack. He cautioned, however, that further research was still needed because scientists often lack other details — for instance, the insects that the birds have been eating through the years — making it hard to prove that these mismatches can be fatal. So the detective work continues. Morgan Tingley, a biologist at the University of Connecticut, is helping to lead a huge multi-university project to comb through satellite data, amateur bird sightings and even volunteer caterpillar counts across North America to understand whether mismatches driven by global warming really are having adverse effects on bird populations  or whether birds might be able to adapt to the seasonal confusion. “We’re confident that mismatches are happening, and we know there will be winners and losers,” said Dr. Miller-Rushing, now the science coordinator at Acadia National Park. “But we’re still in the early days of trying to document it all.” #ExxonKnew, meet #ShellKnew Image Credit Illustration by The New York Times By  John Schwartz Internal documents from Royal Dutch Shell, published by news organizations last week, show that the company’s own research linked fossil fuels and climate change as long ago as the 1980s. (You can read one of the reports, by InsideClimateNews, here .) The documents could expose Shell to the kinds of investigations and lawsuits that have focused on Exxon Mobil following the publication of that company’s climate research by InsideClimate News and The Los Angeles Times in 2015, which led to the accusatory hashtag #ExxonKnew. One Shell report from 1998 envisioned huge storms in the Northeastern United States in 2010 that would lead to lawsuits against the government and fossil fuel companies “on the grounds of neglecting what scientists (including their own) have been saying for years: that something must be done.” A 1988 company report said the risks of climate change might not be fully known until the 2000s, but the implications were “so large that policy options need to be considered much earlier.” “The energy industry needs to consider how it should play its part,” the report said. And even as far back as 1962 , a Shell document suggested the company’s knowledge of the role of carbon dioxide in climate change. The documents, brought to light by the Dutch reporter Jelmer Mommers of De Correspondent , were published on the Climate Files website . Both Exxon and Shell now publicly accept the science of climate change and the need for international action to address the issue. But like Exxon, Shell has in the past supported industry groups that spread misinformation about climate science. A spokeswoman for Shell, Natalie Gunnell, said: “The Shell Group’s position on climate change has been a matter of public record for decades. We strongly support the Paris Agreement and the need for society to transition to a lower carbon future, while also extending the economic and social benefits of energy to everyone.” David M. Uhlmann, a law professor at the University of Michigan who was chief of the environmental crimes section at the Justice Department from 2000 to 2007, said the new documents could find their way into “the already existing lawsuits, particularly the ones brought by the cities and counties in California and by New York City.” Several such suits already list Shell as a defendant. At a more fundamental level, Professor Uhlmann said, the documents show that Exxon was not alone. “Shell also recognized the potentially catastrophic effects of climate change and, like Exxon, reaped short-term profits at the expense of long-term climate disruption that poses an existential threat to the planet,” he said. “What is particularly disturbing about Shell is that the company knew the risks involved and also realized that it would be difficult to act before it was too late — and Shell failed to act anyway.” We’d love your feedback on this newsletter. Please email thoughts and suggestions to climateteam@nytimes.com . If you like what we’re doing, please spread the word and send this to your friends. You can sign up here to get our newsletter delivered to your inbox each week. And be sure to check out our full assortment of free newsletters from The Times. Brad Plumer is a reporter covering climate change, energy policy and other environmental issues for The Times's climate team. @bradplumer John Schwartz is part of the climate team. Since joining The Times in 2000, he has covered science, law, technology, the space program and more, and has written for almost every section. @jswatz • Facebook Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              