   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Politics Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Right and Left on Trump’s DACA Decision By  Anna Dubenko Sept. 5, 2017 The political news cycle is fast, and keeping up can be overwhelming. Trying to find differing perspectives worth your time is even harder. That’s why we have scoured the internet for political writing from the right and left that you might not have seen. Has this series exposed you to new ideas? Tell us how. Email us at ourpicks@nytimes.com . For an archive of all the Partisan Writing Roundups, check out Our Picks . From the Right Image Supporters of DACA rallied in New York last week. Credit Hiroko Masuike/The New York Times Joel B. Pollack in Breitbart : “As frustrating as that may be to those who want to see DACA totally wiped off the books, and every one of its beneficiaries given a one-way bus ticket across the border, letting Congress decide what to do about the ‘Dreamers’ is exactly what ought to happen.” Mr. Pollack believes that President Trump has made the right decision by putting the responsibility, and the pressure, on the shoulders of Congress. There are reasons, he writes, for both “amnesty opposers” and supporters of the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals program, known as DACA, to rejoice at this development. Those who oppose the measure “can take heart from the fact that this Congress seems incapable of passing anything at all.” And those who want to keep DACA “know they only need a few G.O.P. votes” to extend the program. Read more » _____ Erick Erickson in The Resurgent : “While in principle I support DACA, I do not believe the President has the power to enact it without legislation.” Mr. Erickson admits that the president “probably does not have constitutional motives for undoing DACA.” That doesn’t change the fact that, according to Mr. Erickson, the program is unconstitutional. And while he supports DACA in principle, he maintains that “the constitution has to override everything else,” including his personal preferences. Read more » _____ Andrew C. McCarthy in National Review : “Trump should do what he should have done his first day in office. He should declare the Obama-administration guidance null and void.” The president has made the DACA problem “more complicated than it needs to be,” writes Mr. McCarthy. He outlines a “straightforward” solution that hews to the “limitations of his office.” While he helps Congress “hammer out a legislative compromise,” Mr. Trump could use prosecutorial discretion — a “resource-allocation doctrine” that allows the executive branch to prioritize which cases it pursues — to protect the so-called dreamers from prosecution. Read more » _____ From the Left Image President Trump outside the White House last week. Credit Al Drago for The New York Times Mark Joseph Stern in Slate : “Trump will take a lot flack for ending DACA, and he’ll deserve it. But the truth is that Republican politicians forced his hand. Republican xenophobia predates Trump, and it’ll outlive him, too.” Phasing out DACA, Mr. Stern reminds his readers, wasn’t the president’s idea. Instead, he writes, “the bulk of the blame for killing DACA will fall on the Republican Party.” Spearheaded by Attorney General Ken Paxton of Texas, Republican hard-liners forced the Trump administration to take a stand on a program that it had previously treated as a “kind of institutional compromise: a policy that it wouldn’t have implemented but wasn’t eager to jettison.” Read more » _____ Leah Litman in Take Care : “Ending DACA is not a principled standard about the separation of powers. Rescinding DACA either caters to a base that wants the United States to be unthinkably cruel to immigrants, or fulfills officials’ desire to force immigrants into hopeless, difficult situations.” Arguments that hold that DACA should have gone through Congress would be “slightly more credible if it came from an administration that had not embraced expansive views of presidential authority,” writes Ms. Litman. The administration’s statements on the travel ban betray a “breathtakingly broad” interpretation of the president’s authority in issues of immigration. Moreover, she points out, “Republican legislators voted against doing DACA legislatively,” when they voted against the Dream Act. Any claim Republicans make toward wanting to pass DACA through legislation, is “just window dressing.” Read more » _____ And Finally, From the Center: The editorial board of USA Today : “The right approach is to just leave the program alone, acknowledging that it works and that 800,000 people should not be cast into exile or used as pawns in a political chess match.” USA Today’s editorial board argues that ‘dreamers,’ “more than any other immigrant group,” are well assimilated into American culture. Their departure would be “disruptive” to their communities and for the economy: “Many have become small business owners or have highly coveted job skills.” Read more » _____ Anna Maria Barry-Jester in Five Thirty Eight : “For months, some pro-immigrant groups have warned against sending in new applications for the program, saying that the detailed information given to confirm eligibility could be used to deport enrollees or family members in the future.” Even if Mr. Trump decided not to do away with DACA, writes Ms. Barry-Jester, damage to the program — and re-enrollment rates — has already been done. While she acknowledges that polling of undocumented populations is notoriously unreliable, the best available data shows that a substantial proportion of those protected by DACA are hesitant to reapply to the program for fear that their personal information will lead to deportation. Read more » _____ Ben Smith in BuzzFeed : “President Trump, cornered, weakened, and apparently unable to get his hands on the usual levers of presidential powers, has adopted pretty much the worst possible strategy for someone trying to wield the power of the most powerful job in the world: He’s shooting the hostages.” Mr. Smith points out that the president has made a habit of squandering any political leverage he has for no tangible returns. It’s one thing that contributes to the “surprising weakness of his presidency.” Rather than using DACA as a bargaining chip in exchange for a larger, more nationalist immigration bill, President Trump will spend more of his political capital only to, possibly, become a “sulking bystander” if Congress restores the program. Read more » (We previously listed Mr. Smith in this article under the left section, but he took issue with that categorization.) _____ Want the Partisan Writing Roundup in your inbox? Sign up for the Morning Briefing Newsletter or the What We’re Reading Newsletter . Have thoughts about this collection? Email feedback to ourpicks@nytimes.com .  Get politics and Washington news updates via Facebook , Twitter and the Morning Briefing newsletter . Related Coverage Trump Moves to End DACA and Calls on Congress to Act Sept. 5, 2017 Image Battered by Harvey, Immigrants in Houston Brace for a DACA Decision Sept. 4, 2017 Image On DACA, President Trump Has No Easy Path Sept. 4, 2017 Image Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              