   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Music Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Popcast How Chuck Berry Became a Rock ’n’ Roll Mastermind Image The ever-expressive Chuck Berry in 1986. Credit James A. Finley/Associated Press By  The New York Times March 22, 2017 The Popcast is hosted by Jon Caramanica, a pop music critic for The New York Times. It covers the latest in pop music criticism, trends and news. The babies born after World War II were turning into teenagers, and they craved entertainment. “You had this bumper crop, this demographic wave, and they needed something to do and something to listen to — and you could sell them stuff,” explains The New York Times chief pop music critic, Jon Pareles, on the new Popcast. “It was an affluent time. There was leisure time for cars and girls, which is what Chuck Berry, in his genius, calculated and sang about.” Mr. Berry, who died on Saturday at the age of 90 , was the foundation of rock ’n’ roll — a pioneer of its sound, its politics, its look, its swagger. “He made this synthesis that in retrospect seems absolutely natural,” Mr. Pareles said. “Somebody had to come up with it and he was the guy who did.” On this week’s Popcast, Mr. Caramanica and Mr. Pareles discuss how Mr. Berry’s songwriting and performance style developed, and they listen to a handful of his lesser-known songs. (You’ve likely heard “Johnny B. Goode” a lot in the past few days; you won’t hear it here.) While the formula Mr. Berry developed was “calculated,” the songs are also “wild,” Mr. Pareles notes. “There’s a recklessness in them you still hear in them now.” Along with his contemporaries — Elvis Presley, Little Richard, Jerry Lee Lewis and Carl Perkins — Mr. Berry helped create “an American music that was polyracial,” Mr. Pareles said. “But let it be said, Chuck Berry was writing these things and Elvis Presley was not. Chuck Berry was the mastermind. Elvis Presley was the voice and the costumes and the moves, but Chuck Berry was the grand master.” Mr. Berry’s career, however, was not without interruption. After he served time in jail, he returned to a changed musical landscape. The Rolling Stones and the Beatles had covered his songs while he was away, and he was losing ground to himself. As Mr. Pareles explained, “The persistent story of pop is the whitefacing of black music.” But Mr. Berry will always be remembered as rock’s first storyteller: “That’s one thing that he really brought to rock in its early days,” Mr. Pareles said. “He can tell you a story in like, three images and a joke. And it’s a great story.” Email your questions, thoughts and ideas about what’s happening in pop music to popcast@nytimes.com . Related Coverage Chuck Berry, Rock ’n’ Roll Pioneer, Dies at 90 March 18, 2017 Image 15 Essential Chuck Berry Songs March 19, 2017 Image Chuck Berry, Fiery and Flinty Rock ’n’ Roll Innovator March 19, 2017 Image video Chuck Berry's Rock ’n’ Roll Legacy March 18, 2017 Image Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              