   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Politics Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Before Emptying the White House, Obama’s Glittering Round of Farewells Image President Obama with the Chicago Cubs during a celebration of their World Series win at the White House this week. Credit Stephen Crowley/The New York Times By  Mark Landler Jan. 19, 2017 WASHINGTON — It was the most fitting finale to Barack Obama’s presidency, squeezed into a glittering round of goodbye parties. And yet it was almost a casualty of politics. On Monday, four days before Mr. Obama was to hand the presidency to Donald J. Trump, the Chicago Cubs visited the White House to celebrate their first World Series championship since 1908. It was a rollicking event, with references to the team’s rabid fans in the West Wing and jibes at the one person there who is not — Mr. Obama, a Chicago White Sox fan. The original thinking, two people close to the White House said, was to hold the ceremony later in the spring with Mr. Trump. He had after all named Todd Ricketts, a member of the family that owns the Cubs, as deputy commerce secretary. But Mr. Ricketts’s sister, Laura, is a big supporter of Mr. Obama, and she pushed for an event before the end of his presidency. As a result, the team’s chairman, Tom Ricketts, agreed to move up the formal celebration. A spokesman for Mr. Ricketts, Dennis Culloton, denied division within the Ricketts family over the timing of the event, and said simply, “Tom’s position is, ‘If the president invites you, you go.’” For Mr. Trump, however, it was a reminder of the stardust that showers his predecessor, particularly in his last celebrity-drenched days in the White House. On Jan. 6, the Obamas had an all-night party at the White House with a guest list that included Paul McCartney, Meryl Streep, Tom Hanks and Stevie Wonder. Witnesses reported that Mr. Obama tried competitive dancing in a dance circle in the East Room. It was a humbling experience, one said: He faced off against Usher, a pop star who dances at least as well as Mr. Obama speaks, and had trouble holding his own against the talk-show host Stephen Colbert. A few days later, Bruce Springsteen turned up in the State Dining Room to play a two-hour acoustic set for about 200 members of the White House staff. Between songs, he told stories about his life and read from his best-selling memoir, “Born to Run.” Mr. Trump in the meantime has had trouble attracting A-list performers to his inauguration. And a Springsteen cover band, the B-Street Band, snubbed him this week by canceling a show at the unofficial Garden State Inaugural Gala. The band’s keyboardist and founder, Willie Forte, said, “The most important thing to us is that we’re not construed as being disrespectful or ungrateful to Springsteen and his music and the E Street Band.” Image The West Wing’s bare walls on Thursday set a different tone from the celebrity-filled parties that gave Mr. Obama a big exit. Credit Stephen Crowley/The New York Times In this White House’s characteristically methodical way, planning for Mr. Obama’s final weeks began a year ago, said Jennifer Psaki, the communications director. Last summer, his aides broached the idea of a farewell address and recommended doing it during his penultimate week, rather than the last, so the pre-inauguration buzz would not overshadow it. “When you’re a year out, there’s a recognition that there’s an end date,” Ms. Psaki said. “You understand you have limited time and you need to make the most of it. And three weeks is a very short period of time, so you better plan it the best way you can.” Some of the events were predictable: Mr. Obama sat for exit interviews with Steve Kroft of “60 Minutes,” George Stephanopoulos of “This Week” and Lester Holt of “NBC Nightly News.” Mr. Holt talked to the president on Air Force One as he flew to Chicago for the farewell speech. But Mr. Obama had requests of his own, including a lunch in the White House with five of his favorite writers: Dave Eggers, Colson Whitehead, Zadie Smith, Barbara Kingsolver and Junot Díaz. Mr. Obama, who said he planned to write a memoir, quizzed the writers about their tradecraft (he told them he liked to write first drafts in longhand on yellow legal pads). Michiko Kakutani, the chief book critic of The New York Times, sat in on the lunch and interviewed Mr. Obama afterward about his reading life. Mr. Díaz, who had been a critic of Mr. Obama on some of his immigration policies, wrote on his Facebook page that he did not expect to be invited. “What surprised me was how completely unbowed President Obama was, how certain he was that the country would find its way,” Mr. Díaz wrote. “He burned with optimism and faith invincible.” The president is also handing out parting gifts. Longtime aides are getting a print of Shepard Fairey’s poster of Mr. Obama above the slogan “Hope,” which became a symbol of the 2008 campaign. Staff members, most of whom packed up their offices last weekend, are marking the end with various rituals. Valerie Jarrett, a senior adviser, took a last walk around the grounds and wrote about it on Twitter. “Will be watching from outside the gate after tomorrow,” she said. Ben Rhodes, the deputy national security adviser who negotiated the diplomatic opening with Cuba, said he planned to finish off an 18-year-old bottle of Cuban rum. For Mr. Obama’s original band of brothers, several of whom left the White House years ago, the last days have been an excuse to return to their old stamping ground. On Wednesday, after holding his final news conference in the briefing room, the president gave his last interview, not to journalists but to four former advisers — Jon Favreau, Tommy Vietor, Jon Lovett and Dan Pfeiffer — who now host a political podcast, “Pod Save America.” “I cannot believe that people actually listen to you guys,” Mr. Obama said by way of an opening. Beforehand, the aides reminisced in the Oval Office with their former boss about their first day at work in January 2009. Mr. Vietor, who first volunteered for Mr. Obama when he was running for the Senate from Illinois, said: “I told him I’d be a supervolunteer forever, and that includes helping him move. He said that wasn’t necessary because he still has movers.” David Axelrod, another former senior adviser, had booked Mr. Obama on his podcast, “The Axe Files,” a few days earlier. He was on hand Thursday for the president’s last full day at work, when Mr. Obama commuted the sentences of 330 nonviolent drug offenders. And he was invited to the all-night bash, during which Mr. Obama and his wife, Michelle, served their guests chicken and waffles. “Had a nice chat with Paul McCartney,” Mr. Axelrod said. Carl Hulse and Michael S. Schmidt contributed reporting.  A version of this article appears in print on , on Page A 20 of the New York edition with the headline: Before Emptying White House, Many Farewells . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              