   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Politics Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Devin Nunes Is Criticized for Keeping Subpoena Power in Russia Inquiry Image Representative Devin Nunes, right, chairman of the House Intelligence Committee, and Representative Adam B. Schiff, the committee’s top Democrat, speaking to reporters on Capitol Hill in March. Credit Gabriella Demczuk for The New York Times By  Emmarie Huetteman June 1, 2017 WASHINGTON — The Republican chairman of the House Intelligence Committee was strongly criticized on Thursday by the panel’s ranking Democrat for refusing to give up his subpoena power over the investigation into Russian interference in the 2016 election less than two months after announcing he would step away from the inquiry. The chairman, Representative Devin Nunes of California, on Wednesday also issued three subpoenas to law enforcement and intelligence agencies seeking information about the so-called unmasking of associates of President Trump whose identities were incidentally caught up in surveillance of foreign operatives. The subpoenas resurfaced Mr. Trump’s dubious claims about Obama-era surveillance at a time when Mr. Trump is facing serious questions about whether he tried to interfere in the F.B.I.’s investigation. “When someone says they’re going to recuse themselves or step aside from the investigation, you have to expect that they’re not going to insist on having final approval over subpoenas, one of the most important tools of an investigation,” Representative Adam B. Schiff of California, the committee’s top Democrat, said in an interview. Mr. Nunes’s issuance of subpoenas was followed on Thursday morning by a Twitter post from Mr. Trump on the same subject. “The big story is the ‘unmasking and surveillance’ of people that took place during the Obama Administration,” he said. Congressional investigations into Russian meddling will intensify next week, highlighted on Thursday by a public appearance before the Senate Intelligence Committee by the former F.B.I. director James B. Comey. Mr. Comey’s planned testimony, which the Senate committee will hear in both open- and closed-door sessions, forces Mr. Trump to decide whether to invoke executive privilege in an attempt to prevent Mr. Comey from answering questions about his conversations with the president. Image James B. Comey, the former F.B.I. director, will testify next week before the Senate Intelligence Committee about the Russia investigation. Credit Gabriella Demczuk for The New York Times Senators are likely to ask about Mr. Comey’s assertion in a memo that Mr. Trump asked him drop the investigation into Michael T. Flynn, the former national security adviser — a request that some Democrats say amounts to obstruction of justice. Robert S. Mueller III, the special counsel appointed by the Justice Department to lead the investigation into Russian interference in the election, has the authority to investigate obstruction and any other possible crimes. Mr. Nunes recused himself from the Russia investigation after he became the subject of a House ethics inquiry over his handling of sensitive material, most likely related to the Russia investigation. He delegated his authority as chairman to Representative Mike Conaway, Republican of Texas. The decision by Mr. Nunes to unilaterally issue subpoenas on Wednesday to the F.B.I., the National Security Agency and the C.I.A. came as the House committee also issued subpoenas of two Trump associates — Mr. Flynn and Michael D. Cohen, Mr. Trump’s personal lawyer — and their businesses. Mr. Conaway and Mr. Schiff jointly approved the Russia-related subpoenas, but it was Mr. Nunes who signed them, a duty granted to him as chairman. Under the committee’s rules, subpoenas can be authorized either by the chairman in “consultation” with the top member of the minority party, or by a vote of the full committee. Mr. Schiff said Mr. Nunes did not consult him about his decision to issue the subpoenas related to the unmasking. . Mr. Schiff called on Speaker Paul D. Ryan of Wisconsin, who controls chairmanships, to review Mr. Nunes’s potential interference in the Russia investigation. “While Mr. Conaway leads the Russia investigation, Mr. Nunes remains the chairman of the intel committee and has the right and responsibility to conduct oversight of the intelligence community, especially as it relates to the potential misuse of intelligence agencies against Americans,” AshLee Strong, Mr. Ryan’s spokeswoman, said in an email Thursday. Mr. Nunes framed his decision to issue his own subpoenas as a matter of concern about “civil liberties.” “Seeing a lot of fake news from media elites and others who have no interest in violations of Americans’ civil liberties via unmaskings,” he said on Twitter . He declined to comment further. On March 21 — the day after Mr. Comey made the extraordinary announcement that the F.B.I. was investigating whether Mr. Trump’s campaign colluded with Russian officials to meddle in the election — Mr. Nunes made a secret trip to the White House grounds, where he viewed “dozens” of classified reports. The next morning, Mr. Nunes told reporters he believed Mr. Trump or those around him had been incidentally caught up in foreign surveillance, fueling Mr. Trump’s debunked claim that President Barack Obama had “wiretapped” Trump Tower. After The New York Times reported that Mr. Nunes’s sources were themselves White House officials, Democrats called for him to recuse himself from the investigation. He refused, until the House Ethics Committee opened its own inquiry into whether Mr. Nunes had himself mishandled classified information. The Ethics Committee has yet to release any findings. Members of both parties characterized the “unmasking” subpoenas issued on Wednesday as part of the committee’s oversight responsibilities, separate from the panel’s Russia investigation and in line with previous requests for information from the intelligence community.  Get politics and Washington news updates via Facebook , Twitter and in the Morning Briefing newsletter . A version of this article appears in print on , on Page A 16 of the New York edition with the headline: Nunes Is Criticized for Keeping His Subpoena Power in Russia Inquiry . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Related Coverage Investigation Turns to Kushner’s Motives in Meeting With a Putin Ally May 29, 2017 Image Ex-C.I.A. Chief Reveals Mounting Concern Over Trump Campaign and Russia May 23, 2017 Image Top Russian Officials Discussed How to Influence Trump Aides Last Summer May 24, 2017 Image Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              