   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Weddings Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Lauren Baer and Emily Meyers Jan. 12, 2014 Image Credit Roey Yohai Lauren Elizabeth Baer and Emily Margalit Meyers were married in New York Saturday evening by Rabbi Bruce S. Warshal, with Cantor Lori Corrsin taking part. The ceremony was held at Temple Emanu-El, where Ms. Baer’s paternal great-granduncle, the late Dr. Julius Mark, was the senior rabbi from 1948 to 1977. Ms. Baer (left), 33, is on the secretary of state’s policy planning staff at the State Department in Washington. She advises on the development of foreign policy related to democracy, human rights and international law. She graduated magna cum laude from Harvard and received a master’s degree in development studies from the University of Oxford, where she was a Marshall scholar. She also has a law degree from Yale. She is a daughter of Nancy F. Baer and Richard B. Baer of Palm Beach Gardens, Fla. Her father is a founder and the chief operating officer of the American Commercial Realty Corporation, which is based in West Palm Beach, Fla. Ms. Meyers, 32, is a lawyer with the enforcement division of the Federal Election Commission in Washington. She graduated magna cum laude from Brown and received a law degree from Columbia. She is the daughter of Lynn C. Meyers and Dr. William J. Meyers of Scarsdale, N.Y. Her father is a pediatrician in private practice in New Rochelle, N.Y. Her mother works in Yonkers at Consumer’s Union, the publisher of Consumer Reports, for which she is on a panel that evaluates products. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page ST 13 of the New York edition with the headline: Lauren Baer, Emily Meyers . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              