   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Television Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by What’s on TV Thursday: ‘Can’t Stop Won’t Stop’ and ‘Beerland’ Image Sean Combs in the documentary “Can’t Stop Won’t Stop.” Credit Carlos Araujo By  Gabe Cohn Dec. 28, 2017 A film about the rapper and businessman Sean Combs airs on Fox. And “Beerland” goes to Florida. What’s on TV CAN’T STOP WON’T STOP: A BAD BOY STORY (2017) 8 p.m. on Fox. Sean Combs, perhaps best known as Puff Daddy, produced some of the most popular hip-hop and R&B of the 1990s and early 2000s with his record label, Bad Boy. This film tells the story of his success with the company, using the preparation for a pair of reunion concerts this year as narrative momentum. “We were trying to have fun, we were trying to entertain and we were trying to take risks,” Mr. Combs told The New York Times Magazine in July, in reference to the label’s formative years. THE WOLF OF WALL STREET (2013) 8 p.m. on FXM. Martin Scorsese’s Wall Street story stars Leonardo DiCaprio as Jordan Belfort , a stock trader whose moral compass becomes increasingly erratic as it falls under the influence of cash and quaaludes. For his company, Belfort recruits Donnie Azoff (an eccentric Jonah Hill) and a team of other generally questionable cronies. In his review for The Times, A. O. Scott called the film a “bacchanal of sex, drugs and conspicuous consumption,” writing that it “may tire you out with its hammering, swaggering excess, but it is never less than wide-awake.” BEERLAND 10 p.m. on Viceland. Meg Gill, the founder of the Los Angeles brewery Golden Road, travels around the country in search of great brews in this show. This episode finds her outside of Orlando, Fla., where two brewers use ocean water to make beer. Image Joseph R. Biden Jr. at home. Credit Ryan Pfluger for The New York Times THE LATE SHOW WITH STEPHEN COLBERT  11:35 on CBS. The end of the year means late-night reruns. Last month, Joseph R. Biden Jr. appeared on “ The Late Show ” to discuss his memoir, “Promise Me, Dad,” and, in case you missed it, this episode is airing again. (It also features Elton John as musical guest.) The book primarily covers a period from late 2014 onward, when Mr. Biden dealt with both the question of whether to pursue the Democratic nomination in the 2016 president election and with his son Beau’s illness and death. “I didn’t want to write a book about grief,” Mr. Biden told The Times this year. “I want readers to know that there are people like Beau in this world, who put country first, family first, friends first.” What’s Streaming Image Andrew Garfield, left, and Shin’ya Tsukamoto in “Silence.” Credit Kerry Brown/Paramount Pictures SILENCE (2016) on Amazon and Hulu . If Martin Scorsese’s “The Wolf of Wall Street” is a portrait of humans worshiping money, “Silence,” based on the 1966 novel by Shusaku Endo, is a portrait of humans worshiping God. It stars Andrew Garfield, Liam Neeson and Adam Driver as priests in 17th-century Japan, where the authorities are intent on driving out Christianity in the name of preserving independence. “‘Silence’ is as visually striking as you might expect,” Manohla Dargis wrote in her review for The Times. “But also overly tidy, clean and decorous, despite its tortured flesh, its mud and its blood.” A version of this article appears in print on , on Page C 7 of the New York edition with the headline: What’s On Thursday . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              