   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Opinion Supported by Letters The Questions Around James Comey’s Firing May 11, 2017 Image Rod Rosenstein Credit Gabriella Demczuk for The New York Times To the Editor: Re “ A Letter to the Deputy Attorney General ” (editorial, May 11): Deputy Attorney General Rod Rosenstein’s letter — cited by the White House as the basis for firing James Comey as F.B.I. director — undoubtedly reflected Mr. Rosenstein’s honest appraisal of Mr. Comey and in theory could have been a proper basis for Mr. Comey’s removal. But it clearly was not the real basis for the firing. What is difficult to comprehend is how Mr. Rosenstein could have failed to see how his memo would be used by President Trump to lie about and cover up why Mr. Comey was fired. Mr. Rosenstein was “played” by the president to promulgate false information about the firing and to hide the president’s determination to quash an investigation of his associates and himself, which in my book should be sufficient grounds for impeachment. STEVEN Y. WINNICK, WASHINGTON To the Editor: Both your editorial and David Leonhardt’s column (“ Rod Rosenstein Fails His Ethics Test ,” nytimes.com, May 11) appeal to Mr. Rosenstein’s concern with preserving his own reputation. That may be, calculatingly, the best way to spur some action on his part. Whose historical bed do you want to lie in? But it also reveals, distressingly, the decline of moral compass in our Trumpian society. We should expect Mr. Rosenstein to naturally do the right thing, precisely because it is the right thing, rather than have to appeal to his historical vanity. MARC KAGAN, NEW YORK To the Editor: Your cautionary letter to the deputy attorney general makes as clear as can be that the president puts his own interests ahead of the nation’s. It also makes clear that the president is looking for anything to distract attention from the investigation of his administration’s possible collusion with the Russians to influence the last election. The ultimate distraction would be military confrontation with another nation. No president in his right mind would precipitate a conflict to postpone an investigation. But I wouldn’t put it past this president. Military leaders must have confidence that the public will have their back if they feel the need to question orders that serve no strategic interest, but risk American lives. DAVID KERNIS, TRUMBULL, CONN. To the Editor: Attorney General Jeff Sessions was going to recuse himself from any matter relating to the investigation of Trump connections to the Russians. But he sent the letter to the president calling for the firing of James Comey. That doesn’t sound like a recusal to me. But ethics have never been a major concern to this administration. They just do whatever they want. It is only the country that suffers. MATTHEW SHANNON, WASHINGTON To the Editor: Re “ Trump’s Meeting With Russian Foreign Minister Comes at Awkward Time ” (news article, May 11): President Trump dismisses the F.B.I. director, James Comey, who is leading an investigation into the Trump campaign’s Russian ties. Hours later, the president meets with Russia’s foreign minister and ambassador — an ambassador at least two administration officials have lied about their contacts with. No American reporters are admitted to the meeting, and the only pictures come from a Russian news agency. The New York Times calls the timing of these events “awkward.” Awkward doesn’t quite cover this situation. Perhaps the word The Times was searching for is “suspicious.” But if that doesn’t work, “troubling” or “alarming” would also do. JANNI SIMNER, TUCSON To the Editor: Pundits and politicians have assured the public that the investigation into Russian intrusion into the American political process will proceed because of the professionalism of F.B.I. agents. However, in “ Inside F.B.I., a Darkening Mood and Rising Doubts About an Investigation ” (news article, May 11), F.B.I. agents who were interviewed question precisely that point. There are many ways in which a new director can impede the investigation, and the public has little information on the inner workings of the bureau. This points up the crying need for an independent, nonpartisan commission or a special prosecutor to take up the investigation. DANIEL R. GROSS, DECATUR, GA. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page A 28 of the New York edition with the headline: The Questions Around Comey’s Firing . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              