   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Opinion Supported by Letter Immorality of Private Prisons March 1, 2017 To the Editor: Re “ U.S. to Keep Private Prisons, Scrapping an Obama Plan ” (news article, Feb. 24): The news that Attorney General Jeff Sessions favors using privately owned prisons is disheartening. Of all the functions of sovereignty, the liberty of the individual is one of most significant. It is an outrageous misuse of government power to allow a private entity to imprison any individual. To permit this demeans the government and is an immoral action by its officers. In addition, to permit a profit-making company to do this should never be allowed. No one should be able to profit from imprisoning others, and that is true whether the prison holds criminal or civil inmates. Detention of illegal immigrants is a civil matter, and those prisons must also be run by the government. PAUL SILVERSTONE, NEW YORK A version of this article appears in print on , on Page A 26 of the New York edition with the headline: Private Prisons . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              