   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Opinion Supported by Letters President Trump’s Bombshell Interview July 20, 2017 Image In an interview with three New York Times reporters in the Oval Office, President Trump left little doubt that the Russia investigation remained a sore point. Credit Doug Mills/The New York Times To the Editor: Re “ Trump Lashes Out at Russia Inquiry and Its Overseers ” (front page, July 20): In his interview with The New York Times on Wednesday, President Trump bemoaned the Russia inquiry, Attorney General Jeff Sessions’s recusal from it and the Senate Republicans’ (and Mr. Trump’s) failure to create a replacement for the Affordable Care Act. Like a child who is used to getting his way, Mr. Trump — who is not ready for prime time — is holding his breath and then screaming, ranting and threatening those around him as his presidential way of leading America. This apprentice is a failure at supporting American democracy and is trying to take this country in another direction. RICH LURIE, BOYNTON BEACH, FLA. To the Editor: Clearly, President Trump is becoming more uncomfortable and impatient with all the investigations swirling around him. In light of his bogus Advisory Commission on Election Integrity, and given all the suspicious and questionable behavior we have been witnessing, it seems in order to create a nonpartisan Commission on Presidential Integrity to investigate the president, his staff and his family’s conduct during the campaign and since the inauguration. Given the resignation of Walter M. Shaub Jr. from the Office of Government Ethics, the need for such a commission, with powers to subpoena and call witnesses, should be a high priority. C. TOM GAREY SANTA BARBARA, CALIF. To the Editor: Re “ Sessions Vows to Remain Attorney General ‘as Long as That Is Appropriate’ ” (nytimes.com, July 20): If Attorney General Jeff Sessions has even a shred of integrity remaining, he would have immediately tendered his resignation. President Trump has gone public with a clear statement that he has lost confidence in him; how can he stay in office? Of course, given the Trump administration’s record of appointments, we may see an even less qualified candidate get nominated. But Mr. Sessions spoke emotionally about his honor in the hearings on the Russia controversy, and an honorable man would have to resign under these circumstances. TONY PELL, BOSTON To the Editor: Regarding President Trump’s interview with The Times and his comment about Attorney General Jeff Sessions’ recusing himself from the Russia investigation: Is it not in a president’s responsibility to vet his nominations for cabinet positions thoroughly before presenting them for confirmation? When will our president take responsibility for his actions? Mr. Sessions followed the law when he chose to recuse himself from this investigation. Should not the president want his attorney general to follow the law rather than make decisions based on what would be preferable to the president? AMY V. JAFFE, NEW YORK To the Editor: The irony of President Trump’s faux astonishment regarding Attorney General Jeff Sessions — “how do you take a job and then recuse yourself?” — is quite remarkable. Similar questions abound. How does Donald Trump take multiple bank loans and then declare bankruptcy? How does Donald Trump hire contractors and then not pay them? How does Donald Trump malign Gold Star families and then claim to “love” the military? How does Donald Trump assault women and then claim that he is for them? Clearly we have a president who doesn’t understand that his appointees are sworn to uphold the Constitution, not him. DAN POLITI, SUFFERN, N.Y. To the Editor: One wonders why Donald Trump would even bother giving an interview to a newspaper that he has declared to be “fake news.” Could it be that he secretly longs for the legitimacy that only The New York Times can confer on him? CAROLYN BROSS BLOOMINGDALE, N.J. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page A 26 of the New York edition with the headline: The President’s Bombshell Interview . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              