   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Arts Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Artist Says Kendrick Lamar Video for ‘Black Panther’ Song Stole Her Work Image Left, an image from the video for “All the Stars” by Kendrick Lamar and SZA; right, the painting “Constellation I” by Lina Iris Viktor. Credit Left, Universal Music Group; right, Lina Iris Viktor, via Mariane Ibrahim Gallery By  Robin Pogrebin Feb. 11, 2018 The team behind “Black Panther,” the film featuring the first black superhero to appear in mainstream comics, is facing allegations by a British-Liberian artist that her work was used without permission in Kendrick Lamar’s just-released music video for “All the Stars,” a song from the movie’s soundtrack. On Saturday, Christopher Robinson, a lawyer for the artist Lina Iris Viktor, sent a letter to Mr. Lamar’s mentor and label head, Anthony Tiffith at Top Dawg Entertainment, alleging a copyright violation of the 24-karat gold, patterned artworks in her series of paintings “Constellations.” Ms. Viktor had been contacted twice by the film’s creators for permission to feature her work, the letter says, but she decided not to participate. “The infringement of Ms. Viktor’s rights is willful and egregious,” the letter says, adding that the artist is willing “to discuss a resolution of all her claims, consisting at a minimum of a public apology for the unauthorized use and a license fee.” In a telephone interview, Ms. Viktor said, “Why would they do this? It’s an ethical issue, because what the whole film purports is that it’s about black empowerment, African excellence — that’s the whole concept of the story. And at the same time they’re stealing from African artists.” “Black Panther,” which will be released on Feb. 16 and is already shaping up to be a cultural phenomenon , is an American superhero film based on the Marvel Comics character of the same name, produced by Marvel Studios and distributed by Walt Disney Studios Motion Pictures . Mr. Lamar, Mr. Tiffith and Disney declined to comment. The music video director Dave Meyers, who oversaw “All the Stars” along with Mr. Lamar and his creative partner Dave Free (known together as “the little homies”), did not respond to requests to comment. After this story’s publication, the people involved in making the film said they played no role in the creation of the video. In detailing the infringement, the letter says the video contains a 19-second segment (starting at the 2:59 mark) “that incorporates not just the immediately-identifiable and unique look of her work, but also many of the specific copyrightable elements in the ‘Constellations’ series of paintings, including stylized motifs of mythical animals, gilded geometric forms on a black background, and distinctively textured areas and patterns, arrayed in a grid-like arrangement of forms.” Nancy E. Wolff, a copyright lawyer who currently serves as the president of the Copyright Society of the USA, said that the video’s directors are likely to argue that the images in the video are not exact copies. But because the gold-on-black aesthetic of Ms. Viktor’s work “is so strong,” Ms. Wolff said, “it’s just going to look like it’s the same.” “It’s really tricky because style is not protected,” Ms. Wolff added, “but I can see why everyone assumed this artist was involved.” Ms. Viktor said she found out about the video from friends who called to say they’d seen her work in it. And a story about the video on the website Okay Africa last week noted, “The work and influence of British-Liberian artist Lina Iris Viktor can be clearly spotted.” In November 2016, according to the lawyer’s letter, Ms. Viktor was contacted by an assistant to Jay Hart, a Marvel set decorator, asking to feature her work, “Constellations I” in the movie, then titled “Motherland.” Ms. Viktor was prepared to consider participating, but ultimately found the financial and artistic terms unacceptable, which ended further discussions. (Mr. Hart later said in an email that he did not work on the music video and that Ms. Viktor’s work does not appear in the “Black Panther” film.) In December 2017, the letter continues, Mariane Ibrahim-Abdi Lenhardt of the Seattle-based Mariane Ibrahim Gallery , which represents Ms. Viktor, was again contacted about the movie by the public relations firm DDA, on behalf of Marvel and Disney. The firm was asking several artists to create work inspired by the Black Panther character for use in promoting the film, including a video, social media and events around the premiere. Ms. Viktor rejected DDA’s demand that she “enter into an exclusive license for the proposed artworks, thereby forgoing all artistic control,” the letter says, in part because her “Constellations” series was in the works for the Armory Show in March, “a solo exhibition in a major art fair that would be a milestone in her career.” “We’re in an age when no is supposed to mean no in whatever field you’re in,” Mr. Robinson said in a telephone interview. “It’s outrageous that they’re taking advantage of her.” The Armory Show installation continues Ms. Viktor’s exhibition at the Amar Gallery in London last year, “ Black Exodus: Act I — Materia Prima ,” which explored narratives around race and the African diaspora. A solo show of her work will also be presented in October at the New Orleans Museum of Art. “We were not interested in giving exclusivity for promotion of a campaign,” Ms. Ibrahim said in an interview. “My main objective was to bring that work to the art community, collectors and institutions.” Ms. Viktor added: “We walked away. That’s the last I heard.” Mr. Lamar, who last month won five Grammys for his latest album, “DAMN.,” was handpicked by the “Black Panther” director Ryan Coogler to produce and curate the official soundtrack, which includes music from and inspired by the film. The album was released Friday, and features songs by an all-star lineup of hip-hop and R&B acts including Mr. Lamar, SZA, Future, the Weeknd and Travis Scott. “All the Stars,” the lead single from the soundtrack by Mr. Lamar and SZA, currently sits at No. 54 on the Billboard Hot 100, and its music video was played more than 9 million times on YouTube in its first four days. In an interview, Ms. Viktor said what matters to her most is the principle, not compensation. “Cultural appropriation is something that continually happens to African-American artists,” she said, “and I want to make a stand.” Joe Coscarelli contributed reporting.  A version of this article appears in print on , on Page C 1 of the New York edition with the headline: ‘Black Panther’ Team In Clash Over Music Video . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Related Coverage Review: ‘Black Panther’ Shakes Up the Marvel Universe Feb. 6, 2018 Image ‘Black Panther’ Brings Hope, Hype and Pride Feb. 9, 2018 Image Kendrick Lamar on His New Album and the Weight of Clarity March 16, 2015 Image Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              