   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Politics Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by The F.B.I. Is Scrutinizing Trump’s Russia Ties. How Will That Work? Image The F.B.I. director, James B. Comey, testified before the House Intelligence Committee on Monday in Washington. Credit Eric Thayer for The New York Times By  Michael S. Schmidt and Matt Apuzzo March 21, 2017 WASHINGTON — Counterintelligence investigation. Wiretapping. Unauthorized disclosures of classified national security secrets. Those phrases punctuated congressional testimony on Monday when the F.B.I. director, James B. Comey, said for the first time publicly that the bureau was conducting a counterintelligence investigation into whether members of the Trump presidential campaign worked with Russia to influence the 2016 election. Mr. Comey’s comments introduced many concepts that most people rarely hear. The intelligence community has concluded that the Russian government employed a variety of tactics — including the hacking and release of Democrats’ emails — to sway the election against Hillary Clinton. Here are some answers to questions that came out of Mr. Comey’s testimony: What is a counterintelligence investigation? Unlike a typical criminal investigation into organized crime or drug trafficking, a counterintelligence case is not typically focused on prosecuting someone. It is more spycraft than law enforcement. Every day, teams of F.B.I. agents listen to wiretaps on foreign officials and conduct surveillance on people suspected of being foreign agents in cities around the country. But once they know someone is a spy, they do not necessarily swoop in with handcuffs. In the counterintelligence world, it is often most valuable to watch these people — maybe for years — and learn whom they talk to, what their mission is and how they operate. Counterintelligence is about finding out how America’s foreign adversaries are conducting espionage, and preventing it. Although counterintelligence cases rarely receive attention, the issue is considered the F.B.I.’s top priority after counterterrorism. If such cases are not focused on prosecutions, is anyone ever charged with spying? Not often, but there are exceptions. The Justice Department is aggressive in prosecuting people who steal trade secrets. And American turncoats like Aldrich Ames of the C.I.A. and Robert Hanssen of the F.B.I. are serving life sentences for spying on behalf of Russia. In this instance, the F.B.I. is investigating the very broad matter of Russian meddling in the 2016 election. Typically, the goal of such a case would be to thoroughly understand what happened and prevent it from happening again. But Mr. Comey added that as part of that investigation, agents were asking whether Mr. Trump’s campaign colluded with Russia. That opens up the possibility of criminal charges. How long will this investigation take? Counterintelligence cases are among the most difficult, time-consuming inquiries the F.B.I. conducts. It is not unusual for an investigation to go on for years. The obstacles are typically great, including the fact that the United States cannot openly gather intelligence in foreign countries. At the hearing, Mr. Comey appeared to acknowledge as much. “This investigation began in late July, so for counterintelligence investigation, that’s a fairly short period of time,” he said. Compare this with the F.B.I.’s last prominent, politically charged national security investigation: the inquiry into Mrs. Clinton’s private email server. At this point in that investigation — eight months in — F.B.I. agents were fairly confident they had a handle on the scope of the evidence and believed it was unlikely anyone would be charged. They had a timeline and could predict that the investigation was close to completion. That is not the case here. The F.B.I. wouldn’t be investigating Mr. Trump’s aides without evidence of wrongdoing, right? Yes and no. The F.B.I. has the authority to investigate crimes, but the mere fact that agents are looking at Mr. Trump’s aides does not mean they can prove wrongdoing. In fact, American officials have said there is no proof of collusion between Russia and the Trump campaign. Still, current and former officials say they have uncovered evidence that Mr. Trump’s associates were in repeated contact with Russians . The F.B.I. is scrutinizing those contacts. What kind of measures will the F.B.I. take during its investigation? It is hard to say because nearly everything that counterintelligence agents do is classified. Even their investigative methods are considered too secret to make public. The New York Times has reported that some of the evidence uncovered so far came from intercepted conversations between officials inside the Kremlin who discussed their meetings with Mr. Trump’s associates. The United States, like other countries, also has a worldwide network of paid informants who provide information about the inner workings of foreign governments. And the F.B.I. has access to waves of reports from other intelligence agencies and foreign allies. Mr. Trump said he was wiretapped. How does that fit into this? It doesn’t, really. In a barrage of tweets this month, Mr. Trump accused President Barack Obama of having him wiretapped at Trump Tower during the campaign. That claim has since been rejected by Mr. Obama and all corners of the federal government. Mr. Comey and the director of the National Security Agency, Adm. Michael S. Rogers, said definitively on Monday that there was no evidence that such eavesdropping occurred. Whether calculated or not, Mr. Trump’s Twitter posts provided a confusing distraction in the discussion about Russian interference. Though the claims have been widely rejected by Mr. Trump’s own national security officials, the White House stands by them and believes that the president will be proved correct. But some members of the House and Senate Intelligence Committees from both parties have indicated that no evidence exists — and that they will focus instead on questions of Russian meddling in the election. What could come of Republican lawmakers’ calls for the F.B.I. to crack down on national security leaks ? Mr. Comey declined to say whether the bureau was conducting any leak investigations. But he talked repeatedly about the seriousness raised by these types of disclosures, giving the impression that the F.B.I. will be investigating them.  Get politics and Washington news updates via Facebook , Twitter and in the Morning Briefing newsletter . A version of this article appears in print on , on Page A 18 of the New York edition with the headline: Inside  the F.B.I. Inquiry on Russia . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              