   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Politics Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Hillary Clinton on Her Political Future: ‘I Am Done With Being a Candidate’ Image Hillary Clinton in New York in April. “I am done with being a candidate,” she said in an interview on CBS’s “Sunday Morning.” Credit Angela Weiss/Agence France-Presse — Getty Images By  Noah Weiland Sept. 10, 2017 WASHINGTON — Hillary Clinton, who grapples with her second failed presidential run in a new memoir to be published Tuesday, said on Sunday that she does not plan on running again for public office. “I am done with being a candidate,” she said in an interview on CBS’s “Sunday Morning.” Mrs. Clinton said that she would still like a place in American life. “I am not done with politics because I literally believe that our country’s future is at stake,” she said, referring to President Trump and her plans to try to hold him accountable. Mrs. Clinton has not been shy about condemning her former opponent, using her Twitter account to swipe at what she believes are the most egregious actions the Trump administration has taken. “We have a reality show that leads to the election of a president,” she said of the campaign. “He ends up in the Oval Office. He says, ‘Boy, it’s so much harder than I thought it would be. This is really tough. I had no idea.’ Well, yeah, because it’s not a show. It’s real.” The interview kicked off a promotional tour to mark the release of her memoir “What Happened,” Mrs. Clinton’s account of her presidential campaign, the anguish of her loss and her recuperation. She is scheduled to make 15 stops across the country to discuss the book. After losing to Mr. Trump, Mrs. Clinton cleaned her closets in a “frenzy,” she said in the interview. She consumed plenty of white wine. She even changed her breathing habits to calm herself. “Alternate nostril breathing, which I highly recommend,” Mrs. Clinton said. In the book, Mrs. Clinton catalogs the names of people she believes helped doom her campaign, including James B. Comey, the former F.B.I. director who said he would not recommend charges for her use of a private email server but accused her of recklessness. Yet she said in the interview Sunday that she regretted skirting the State Department rules on the use of private email for government business. “Oh, I think the most important of the mistakes I made was using personal email,” she said. Mrs. Clinton also recounted election night and how her eventual loss sank in. “I just kinda went in the bedroom, laid down on the bed, just thought: “O.K., I just have to wait this out,’” she said. “But then, midnight, I decided, ‘Well, you know, looks like it’s not gonna work.’” She called Mr. Trump to congratulate him, then phoned the White House, full of dismayed fellow Democrats working for President Barack Obama. “I felt like I had let everybody down,” she said. “I had not drafted a concession speech. I’d been working on a victory speech.”  Get politics and Washington news updates via Facebook , Twitter and the Morning Briefing newsletter . Related Coverage Hillary Clinton, in Book, Regrets Not Striking Back at James Comey Sept. 7, 2017 Image Opinion Hillary Clinton’s Regrets, Looking Back on the Campaign Sept. 8, 2017 Image Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              