   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index New York Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Open Seat in Westchester May Hold Key to Democratic Unity Image Assemblywoman Shelley B. Mayer is the Democratic nominee for the State Senate seat for the 37th District. “The enthusiasm of women toward my candidacy — and toward women running in local elections — is extraordinary to watch,” she said. Credit Andrew Seng for The New York Times By  Lisa W. Foderaro Jan. 30, 2018 It would seem unlikely that a single state legislative seat in Westchester County could hold the key to Democrats scoring a government trifecta in Albany, an alignment in which one party controls the governorship, as well as both houses of the Legislature. But some political experts say the 37th Senate District may be that pivotal. In November, George Latimer, a Democratic state senator from the 37th District, ran for Westchester County executive and trounced the two-term Republican incumbent, Rob Astorino. Many saw that election as a suburban referendum on the record of President Trump in a county where Democrats outnumber Republicans two-to-one. Now, Mr. Latimer’s former Senate seat is up for grabs, and the special election to replace him has once again assumed heightened implications. While the Assembly has an overwhelming Democratic majority, the Senate is controlled by Republicans, thanks to a power-sharing arrangement between Republicans and several Democrats. Last fall, Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo helped broker a deal in which the breakaway Senate Democrats, known as the Independent Democratic Conference, would form an alliance with the Senate’s mainstream Democrats. But that deal is predicated on Democrats holding the open seat in Westchester, as well as one in the Bronx vacated by Ruben Diaz Sr., who is now a New York City councilman. (A state official said that special elections for all 11 open legislative seats will be held on Apr. 24.) The Bronx seat should be a slam dunk for Democrats, but political pundits say the Westchester seat — long held by Democrats — is less certain: In 2012, Senate Republicans redrew the district map. Doug Colety, chairman of the Westchester Republican County Committee, said: “The district is much better for Republicans than it was in the past.” Image Republican candidate Sarmad Khojasteh, an Iranian immigrant and lawyer, speaking with Shazia Naz, who is from Pakistan, and her daughter Zaiba Azam, not pictured, at the Raceway Diner in Yonkers last week. Credit Andrew Seng for The New York Times Democrats have a different view. “It’s a marvel of modern technology how gerrymandered you can make the New York Senate map,” said Evan Stavisky, a partner in the Parkside Group, a political consulting firm that represents the Senate Democratic Campaign Committee. So far, three candidates have stepped forward to run for the Westchester Senate seat, which covers diverse cities like Yonkers to the south, affluent suburbs like Larchmont and more rural towns like Bedford. Shelley B. Mayer, an assemblywoman from Yonkers , secured the Democratic nomination in mid-January. Ms. Mayer, a lawyer who has been in the Assembly since 2012, said she expected to benefit from the activism of Democratic women angered by President Trump. “The enthusiasm of women toward my candidacy — and toward women running in local elections — is extraordinary to watch,” she said. The county’s Republican Party, meanwhile, has yet to name a candidate. Mr. Colety said that he hoped to nominate someone in early February. Neither of the two declared Republicans — Daniel Schorr and Sarmad Khojasteh — have held office, a fact that Ms. Mayer, 64, seized on. “I’ve been in the world of Albany, and I say it in a positive way because I know how to get things done,” she said. Mr. Schorr was a prosecutor in Queens and Westchester Counties, where he specialized in sex crimes. (In 2009, he lost his bid for Westchester County district attorney) He also served as inspector general for Yonkers, conducting audits and investigations. Now he examines cases of sexual misconduct for Kroll , the private investigative agency. A longtime resident of White Plains, Mr. Schorr, 44, said his experience would help him ferret out corruption in Albany. “I think our state is greatly overtaxed and corruption is part of that,” said Mr. Schorr, a graduate of Harvard Law School. “Every month for the next six months, there is a major corruption trial occurring in New York State.” Mr. Khojasteh, a 36-year-old lawyer of Bedford, has made upward mobility a centerpiece of his campaign . The son of Iranian immigrants — he came to the United States when he was 1 — Mr. Khojasteh grew up in Poughkeepsie and attended the University of Chicago Law School. Image Republican candidate Daniel Schorr, a former assistant district attorney in Queens and Westchester Counties, at an event last week to address violence at New Rochelle High School. Credit Andrew Seng for The New York Times He is now a partner at Kasowitz Benson Torres , the firm that has for many years represented President Trump. Given Westchester’s Democratic tilt, Mr. Khojasteh is naturally defensive about the association. “Westchester is the most educated county in the country,” he said. “I think everyone will appreciate that if you go to a good law school and end up at a law firm like Kasowitz, you will represent prominent clients.” Among his ideas are 529-style savings plans for small businesses, and tax breaks for investors who finance start-ups. “If there is a dishwasher or mechanic or carpenter who wants to be a first-time small business owner,” he said, “we can promote policies to allow them to become the restaurateur, the body shop owner, the contractor.” Were Ms. Mayer to prevail in a special election, there are a number of potential complications with the plan for Democratic reunification; there is a provision, for example, that allows each side to approve the other’s deputies. And even if the two Democratic factions successfully merged, it would technically still leave the party shy of a 32-seat majority, because of Simcha Felder, a Brooklyn Democrat. He is not part of the Independent Democratic Conference, but has nonetheless caucused with Republicans since his election in 2012, saying it favors his constituents. After the deal was announced last fall, Mr. Felder said he could be persuaded to join Democrats, or stay with Republicans, if either side embraces a plan to put armed guards at every New York City school. Meanwhile, Republicans in the Senate seem unlikely to cede control without a struggle. Last fall they suggested that they could retain power through 2018, citing rules they say would prevent a change in leadership without a 38-seat majority. Mike Murphy, a spokesman for Senator Andrea Stewart-Cousins, the leader of the mainline Democratic coalition, scoffed at the notion. “The chamber is made up of 63 members and clearly 32 members is a majority,” he said. “I would hope that the Republicans would not subvert democracy by denying the fundamental principle of majority rule.” A version of this article appears in print on , on Page A 20 of the New York edition with the headline: Westchester Seat May Alter Albany’s Math . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Related Coverage In New York Suburbs, Democrats Flip Two County Executive Seats Nov. 8, 2017 Image Bid to Unite Albany Democrats Ends in More Bickering Instead Dec. 1, 2017 Image In New York Suburbs, Plenty of Democrats — Just Not at the Top Sept. 21, 2017 Image Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              