   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Opinion Supported by The Politics of #HimToo By  Thomas B. Edsall Dec. 14, 2017 Image A sign held up during a #MeToo demonstration outside Trump International Hotel in New York City on Saturday. Credit Brendan Mcdermid/Reuters The issue of sexual misconduct has emerged as a centerpiece of Democratic strategy for taking on President Trump and the Republican Party. That strategy paid off on Tuesday with the defeat of Roy Moore. Senator Kirsten Gillibrand’s decision to bring to center stage charges of sexual harassment leveled by more than a dozen women against Trump has forced the White House onto the defensive. The story so far: On Sunday, Nikki Haley, Trump’s ambassador to the United Nations, broke ranks with the administration, telling John Dickerson on “Face the Nation” that Trump’s accusers “should be heard. They should be heard and they should be dealt with.” Haley added that she is “incredibly proud of the women who have come forward” in all the recent cases of alleged harassment. On Monday, three of Trump’s accusers appeared on NBC Today with Megyn Kelly, following the publication of articles further chronicling Trump’s alleged misconduct in People , The New Yorker , The Atlantic and New York magazine . The liberal filmmaker, Robert Greenwald, released a documentary, “ 16 Women and Donald Trump: Hear Their Stories .” All of these developments are taking place against the backdrop of a pending defamation lawsuit against Trump, who awaits the decision of Jennifer G. Schecter — a New York state judge — who is considering a motion to require Trump to testify under oath in a lawsuit brought by Summer Zervos , a former “Apprentice” contestant. Zervos, who is represented by Gloria Allred, claims that in 2007 Trump “kissed her on the mouth repeatedly, touched her breast and pressed his genitals against her,” without her consent. Zervos contends that she was defamed when Trump dismissed her claims during the campaign as “ lies ” and “ nonsense .” Since the first week of October, when The Times wrote about Harvey Weinstein’s pattern of sexual abuse, the floodwaters have been rising. At least 51 prominent men have been accused of sexual misconduct, ranging from groping to rape. The accused — many of them abruptly removed from their positions — run the ideological and partisan gamut from Garrison Keillor to Leon Wieseltier to John Conyers to Matt Lauer to James Levine to Trent Franks to Al Franken to Charlie Rose and on and on, including, most recently, Mario Batali and Russell Simmons. For Democrats, who have struggled to find traction in their battles with the administration, the explosion of allegations has created an opening to put the focus on Trump — a development greatly enhanced by the Moore debacle . Among Democrats, Gillibrand stands out as the politician who first claimed ownership of the issue, and she is seen by many analysts and commentators as having moved into the front ranks of potential presidential candidates. But what Gillibrand started has become a broader movement encompassing almost the entire Democratic Senate caucus. After initiating the call on Franken to resign his seat, Gillibrand swiftly received remarkably strong support from her colleagues: 32 fellow Democratic senators and the two independent senators who caucus with the Democrats. There seemed to be an emerging consensus with a basic chess tactic: Sometimes you are required to sacrifice a pawn to checkmate the king. In other words, Democrats smell blood, Trump’s blood. Gillibrand now says that Bill Clinton, one of her most steadfast supporters, should have resigned the presidency after his affair with Monica Lewinsky was revealed, and on Monday Gillibrand told CNN that Trump should leave office in the face of “very credible allegations of misconduct and criminal activity.” “I think when we start having to talk about the differences between sexual assault and sexual harassment and unwanted groping, you are having the wrong conversation,” Gillibrand asserted at a news conference on Dec. 6. “You need to draw a line in the sand and say none of it is O.K. None of it is acceptable.” Gillibrand continued: We, as elected leaders, should absolutely be held to a higher standard, not a lower standard, and we should fundamentally be valuing women, and that is where this debate has to go. On Wednesday, Trump did Gillibrand a favor, tweeting: Lightweight Senator Kirsten Gillibrand, a total flunky for Chuck Schumer and someone who would come to my office “begging” for campaign contributions not so long ago (and would do anything for them), is now in the ring fighting against Trump. Very disloyal to Bill & Crooked-USED! USA Today, a publication known for the moderation and balance of its commentary, promptly editorialized : A president who would all but call Sen. Kirsten Gillibrand a whore is not fit to clean the toilets in the Barack Obama Presidential Library or to shine the shoes of George W. Bush. Kathleen Hall Jamieson, an expert on political rhetoric who is the director of the Annenberg Public Policy Center at the University of Pennsylvania, told Ashley Parker of the Washington Post that there were striking parallels between Trump’s Tuesday tweet and his comments in the “Access Hollywood” tape revealed during the campaign in which Trump boasts about grabbing women’s genitals. “In the ‘Access Hollywood’ tape , he says, ‘You can do anything,’ and in the tweet attacking Gillibrand, he says, she ‘would do anything’,” Jamieson said: What that language suggests is that the language for Trump is sexual language. We know he uses that language in a sexual context. One of the strongest arguments in favor of a no-exceptions policy is that if Democrats want to capitalize on the surge of support for the #MeToo movement — and to make use of these issues against Trump and the likes of Roy Moore — they must have clean hands. On Dec. 7, the Pew Research Center released results showing that in our highly polarized era, there is widespread bipartisan concern over sexual harassment, as the accompanying chart shows. Abby K. Wood, a professor of law, political science and public policy at the University of Southern California, made the following case in an email: I’m struck by where the Democrats drew this line. Suppose they had drawn it somewhere between the allegations against Rep. John Conyers and those against Sen. Franken. By requesting retirement from Conyers but continuing to work with Franken, the message would have been that women should simply learn to live with some level of sexual harassment and assault. Instead, they seem to have drawn a bold line: no unwanted touching of any kind is permissible, full stop. Many women, myself included, have been grabbed the way Senator Franken is alleged to have grabbed his victims. To be told — by a political party, no less — that we should no longer expect or tolerate that kind of behavior has the potential to be wildly empowering. Jennifer Lawless, a political scientist at American University, agreed on most points with Wood. In an email, she wrote: I can think only of pluses when considering the Democrats’ strong stand against sexual harassment. Not only can Democrats claim the moral high ground, Lawless argued, but they differentiate themselves from the Republicans on an issue that is not wholly partisan. Doing so provides an opportunity — especially in swing states — to appeal to independents and even some moderate Republican women. Not every supporter of zero tolerance is convinced that it will help win over wavering Republican voters. Samara Klar, a professor of government and public policy at the University of Arizona, wrote by email that the attitudes of Republican women suggest deep partisan distrust of all things Democratic. Exit polls in Alabama showed Moore winning among white women by 29 percentage points, and carrying white women with college degrees by 7 points, although it is worth noting, as the veteran Republican operative Matthew Dowd did , that “when you break out evangelical vs non you get evangelical white women 76-22 Moore; non-evangelical white women 74-21 Jones!” Nonetheless, Klar’s research shows that: For Democratic women, feminism is very closely aligned with being a woman. 55 percent of Democratic women say that the term “feminist” describes them “very well” or “extremely well.” Only 10 percent of Republican women agree with that. Over 60 percent of Republican women say “feminist” describes them “not very well” or “not at all” — only 15 percent of Democratic women agree with that. In fact, 35 percent of Democratic men identify with the term “feminist” — more than triple the percent of Republican women who do so. Klar’s conclusion: the Democrats are not likely to win over any Republican women based on their rejection of Franken and sexual harassment. This does not appear to be as much of a priority for Republican voters. Seth Masket, a political scientist at the University of Denver, noted that it’s no easy thing for Democrats to cast aside longstanding party leaders, but at the same time, those leaders are more expendable than Republican leaders are. Al Franken and John Conyers can easily be replaced by other Democrats, and it costs Democrats nothing to turn against Bill Clinton. Donald Trump is president. The other big plus for Democrats, according to Masket, is that the sexual harassment issue has put the Republican Party in the position of playing fast and loose with moral and legal rectitude, which have long been advantageous topics for them. It is now the Democrats who are drawing clear lines and saying that certain behaviors are unacceptable and must not be tolerated, while Republicans are sounding like moral relativists who will tolerate anything from people who will vote their way. Christina Wolbrecht, a political scientist at Notre Dame, made the case in an email that inaction on Franken on the part of Democrats could have had a severe negative impact: Failing to act on Franken might well have disheartened and disillusioned the activist base that the party desperately needs. This is not a question of turning Republican voters into Democratic voters, but rather of encouraging progressive voters to not just vote Democratic, but to direct their activism, donations, and energy through the party and for its candidates. Still, there is a wide range of opinion on issues of sexual behavior within liberal ranks, including Emily Yoffe writing in Politico , Robert Kuttner writing in the American Prospect and Paul Rosenberg in Salon . In her essay, “Why the #MeToo Moment Should Be Ready for a Backlash,” Yoffe wrote: This amazing moment has a chance to be truly transformative. But it could also go off track if all accusations are taken on faith, if due process is seen as an impediment rather than a requirement and an underpinning of justice, and if men and women grow wary of each other in the workplace. “Shame on the Democrats for this stampede,” Kuttner wrote: Instead of turning on one of their own, Democrats and feminists — and all decent people — should be intensifying the pressure for a full investigation of the Groper-in-Chief. Rosenberg, in turn, declared that a Democratic rush to judgment, casting due process to the wind, in order to strike a virtue-signaling pose that almost surely will look increasingly dark in years to come. In the heat of this intra-Democratic debate, some detect the potential for what they see as a more nuanced approach to the problem. Elizabeth Bartholet , the director of the child advocacy program and a professor at Harvard Law School, who is no fan of Donald Trump, wrote in an email: I think this is another moment we may look back on as a moment characterized by madness and sexual panic even though it is a moment that is important in recognizing serious abuses that deserve to be called out. Bartholet argued that when the posture of Democratic senators is examined cynically, I just wonder how much credibility it has with Democrats openly talking about the need to do this so they could be in the superior position to the Republicans. In a phone interview, Bartholet noted the danger in going too far in limiting relational autonomy. Where do people meet other people? Largely in college, graduate school and work. You do not want to go too far in making relationships in these contexts dangerous. Since hierarchical relationships are pervasive in these environments, Bartholet argues, there is a need also to distinguish between sexual/romantic advances made by men in power and real abuses of power. Bartholet has been one of the leading critics of the sexual harassment policies now adopted by Harvard and many other colleges and universities. In October 2014, she and 27 other members of the Harvard Law School faculty published a letter in the Boston Globe that challenged the university’s harassment policy on a wide range of points. Some of those points are relevant to the current national debate over Franken and other accused politicians: The goal must not be simply to go as far as possible in the direction of preventing anything that some might characterize as sexual harassment. The goal must instead be to fully address sexual harassment while at the same time protecting students against unfair and inappropriate discipline, honoring individual relationship autonomy, and maintaining the values of academic freedom. The law that the Supreme Court and lower federal courts have developed under Title IX and Title VII attempts to balance all these important interests. The university’s sexual harassment policy departs dramatically from these legal principles, jettisoning balance and fairness in the rush to appease certain federal administrative officials. With both political parties coming to realize that the issue of sexual harassment and misconduct may determine who is inaugurated on Jan. 20, 2021, the goal of “balanced” interests will be superseded, at least temporarily, by exigent political considerations. As Slate noted earlier this year, the Zervos defamation lawsuit “is daring Trump to incriminate himself in court” and to fall into the same perjury trap Bill Clinton did in the Paula Jones case — perjury which led to Clinton’s impeachment. And if Democrats retake either the House or the Senate in 2018, it is a virtual certainty that Trump’s accusers will be called to provide sworn testimony, and that the perjury trap will loom again if and when Trump is offered the opportunity to rebut them under oath. Democrats go into 2018 with the deck stacked against them — in the House by a combination of gerrymandering and the concentration of Democratic voters in relatively few districts and in the Senate , by the fact that 23 Democratic seats are up, along with those of the 2 independents who caucus with the Democrats, compared to only 8 Republican seats. Ten of the Democratic seats are in states carried by Trump. Insofar as sexual harassment and misconduct become an electoral issue, it will help the Democrats, but the party cannot depend on that alone to produce a change in control of either branch of Congress. No one knows what the half life of this issue is. Although right now it seems unlikely, it could once again become nearly as invisible as it was three months ago. At the moment, the Democrats’ best ally in building the momentum necessary for a power shift is Trump himself, who has been doing all he can to create the next Democratic wave.  I invite you to follow me on Twitter, @Edsall .  Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter (@NYTopinion) , and sign up for the Opinion Today newsletter . Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              