   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Politics Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Mayors Cancel Meeting With Trump as Justice Dept. Squeezes Sanctuary Cities Image A protester in support of sanctuary cities in Oakland, Calif., this month. Cities in California are among the jurisdictions that have come under Justice Department scrutiny. Credit Josh Edelson/Agence France-Presse — Getty Images By  Katie Benner , Katie Rogers and Maggie Haberman Jan. 24, 2018 WASHINGTON — The immigration battle between the Trump administration and local governments escalated on Wednesday, as the Justice Department increased its pressure on so-called sanctuary cities and Democratic mayors from several of the country’s largest cities responded by canceling a meeting with the president. The Justice Department asked 23 jurisdictions across the country to furnish documents proving that they had not kept information from federal immigration authorities. Mr. Sessions said he would subpoena local governments that failed to respond in a thorough and timely manner. “Protecting criminal aliens from federal immigration authorities defies common sense and undermines the rule of law,” Attorney General Jeff Sessions said in a statement. “Enough is enough.” In objection to the Justice Department’s request, mayors of New York, Chicago and other cities declined to attend a scheduled meeting to discuss infrastructure with President Trump at the White House. Mitch Landrieu, the mayor of New Orleans and the president of the United States Conference of Mayors, said at a news conference in Washington on Wednesday that he saw the Justice Department’s move as an “attack,” and that he could not “in good conscience” attend the White House meeting. “President Trump shouldn’t invite us to the White House for a meeting on infrastructure and three hours before issue the equivalent of what are arrest warrants for standing up for what we believe in and, by the way, what America believes in,” said Rahm Emanuel, the mayor of Chicago. Sarah Huckabee Sanders, the White House press secretary, said on Wednesday that the mayors should take their criticisms to Congress. “The White House has been very clear that we don’t support sanctuary cities, we support enforcing the law and following the law,” Ms. Sanders said. The protest by the mayors adds a local dimension to a roiling national debate over the Trump administration’s restrictive immigration agenda. The 23 jurisdictions that were issued a letter demanding documents include cities in California, Colorado, Florida, Illinois, Kentucky, Mississippi, New Mexico, New York, Vermont and Washington, and the state of Oregon. Read the Letter the Justice Dept. Sent to Sanctuary Cities In a letter, the Justice Department asked 23 cities and states for any documents showing whether their law enforcement arms had withheld information from federal immigration authorities. This is the letter sent to New York. Jan. 24, 2018 The Justice Department contacted those local governments last year over concerns that they had violated a federal statute that says they must not restrict communications with federal authorities about citizenship or immigration status. In a statement on Wednesday, Mr. Sessions reiterated that those local governments would lose federal funding if they violated that statute. The sentiment was echoed by a senior Justice Department official who said the department was taking a step to ensure that communities that accepted federal tax money were complying with federal law. The official would not say what would happen if local governments ignored Mr. Sessions’s letter and fought the subpoena in court, but he said he was optimistic that the jurisdictions would comply with the request for documents. The strong backlash from mayors made it seem unlikely that the local politicians would work amicably with the Trump administration on the issue. Mayor Bill de Blasio of New York, who said he had traveled to Washington to attend the White House meeting but canceled on his way to the capital, called the administration’s decision to release the letter on the day Mr. Trump was to meet with a group of mayors “premeditated” and “incoherent.” As Mr. Trump was set to meet with the mayors who did not cancel, Mr. de Blasio stood in the Capital Hilton and pointedly challenged the White House response, issued through Ms. Sanders, that the mayors who canceled should take up their complaints with Congress. “They’re simply trying to demonize immigrants as part of their current congressional strategy,” Mr. de Blasio said. “That’s what that says to me, if that’s the game they’re playing.” The White House, for its part, characterized the decision by Mr. de Blasio and others not to attend as a stunt, and some mayors still chose to meet with Mr. Trump. “The mayors who choose to boycott this event have put the needs of criminal, illegal immigrants over law-abiding America,” Mr. Trump said, adding that Democrats were responsible for decades of decay within cities. Mr. Trump campaigned on promises to dramatically restrict immigration, and Mr. Sessions has taken a hard line on the issue since his days as an Alabama senator. Since Mr. Trump took office, both men have focused on sanctuary cities , which generally refuse to hold people on immigration agents’ behalf without a warrant from a judge, accusing such places of flouting the law and helping convicted criminals evade deportation. Local officials counter that separating local law enforcement from federal immigration authorities is good policy both legally — they have previously faced lawsuits over honoring immigration detention requests — and from a public safety standpoint, making immigrants more likely to report crimes and serve as witnesses. Over the past year, the local jurisdictions have pushed back hard on the administration’s attempts to force them to abandon their stance by cutting off federal funding to them, with some like Chicago filing lawsuits against the Justice Department. Mr. Emanuel’s office has called the Justice Department’s actions “misguided.” And district court judges in California and Illinois have filed preliminary nationwide injunctions blocking the department from denying grant money to sanctuary cities. On Wednesday, 15 attorneys general filed a brief in support of the Chicago lawsuit, saying that the administration’s efforts to pull federal funds from sanctuary jurisdictions infringes on their right to set their own law enforcement policies. “The Trump administration cannot strip a city or a police department of these critical funds, simply because they don’t like its policies,” Eric T. Schneiderman, the New York attorney general, said in a statement. “President Trump and the D.O.J. do not have the authority to unilaterally transform state and local police into federal immigration agents — or to force a city or state to decide between vital law enforcement grants and the policies they know are necessary to protect public safety,” Mr. Schneiderman said. The letters to the 23 jurisdictions were sent nearly a week after Senate Democrats asked the departments of Justice and Homeland Security for more information about whether the administration would criminally charge local politicians over local laws that create protections for immigrants. The Justice Department official emphasized that the department was fighting to enforce a statute enacted during the Obama administration. He said the letters were sent after Justice Department officials asked the department’s inspector general to evaluate whether many jurisdictions were still eligible for federal dollars based on their compliance with the statute. The report was not conclusive. Based on the review, the department determined that it needed to require nearly two dozen jurisdictions to produce documents related to information sharing with federal immigration agents, including details about their local laws and anything pertaining to policies or practices that could restrict information sharing. Several of the local officials whom the Justice Department had targeted were blindsided by the letters and had not received them before the government announced them. “The Trump administration is once again threatening California and local jurisdictions because we are invoking our constitutionally protected right to protect our resources and the honest, hardworking people who are critical to our economy,” said Kevin de León, the leader of the California State Senate. “No number of threatening letters will change the fact that we are in compliance with federal law, nor will we be bullied or intimidated into betraying our immigrant community.” Carl Hulse contributed reporting.  Get politics and Washington news updates via Facebook , Twitter and the Morning Briefing newsletter . Related Coverage Democrats Question Justice Dept. Power to Charge Sanctuary City Leaders Jan. 18, 2018 Image Opinion Chris Magnus Tucson’s Police Chief: Sessions’s Anti-Immigrant Policies Will Make Cities More Dangerous Dec. 6, 2017 Image Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              