   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index The Learning Network Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Current Events Conversation World Travel, Oprah, Spotting Liars and Advice on Sexting: Our Favorite Student Comments of the Week Image Liuwa Plain National Park in Zambia is No. 14 on our list. Related Article Credit Joao Silva/The New York Times By  The Learning Network Jan. 18, 2018 Thanks to Martin Luther King Day , this was a short week, but, as always, we got lively comments on our writing prompts from students around the country and the world. Wilmington, N.C., always a robust participant in our forums, was well represented, and this week we also saw many excellent comments from Providence, R.I. Teachers, if your students regularly post to our writing prompts and are sometimes called out here, we’d love to hear what the experience has been like — for them and for you. This is a new feature this year, and we’re always seeking feedback. In fact, the email address to which you can write and tell us is LNFeedback@nytimes.com. Thank you in advance! Please note: All student comments have been lightly edited for length, but otherwise appear just as they were originally submitted. _________ Image Our most popular writing prompt this week was “ Where Do You Want to Travel? ” Of the “52 Places to Go in 2018” selected by The Times travel writers, students were most excited about visiting Italy, the Caribbean, Costa Rica, New Orleans and Spain. They also recommended several places not on the list, including Hawaii; Puerto Rico; Tokyo; Taiwan; California; Chennai, India; Moscow and St. Petersburg, Russia; and Sydney, Australia. Commenters wrote lyrically about their desire to travel the world. Olivia Lain from Wrightsville Beach, N.C., visits other places to learn about different people and cultures: From the US places like New Orleans and Ohio, to the farther realms of Chile and Italy, I’d go anywhere. I really enjoy any chance I get to travel. The only country I’ve been to outside of the US is Costa Rica, and I was amazed at how it was simultaneously uniquely its own, but no different at all from home. It sounds like Jada Yuan has my dream job. While the plains of Zambia seem far more exotic than Branson, Missouri, there is something to be gained everywhere, and visiting new places has so many benefits. Your knowledge of the location increases, your palette might experience new flavors, you could listen to languages you never had before. Being around people dissimilar to yourself is what opens your mind, makes people accepting of everyone, and prevents the undue fear of the other that seems to plague this country. If everyone could travel the world, people would understand each other’s points of view, and we would have far more empathy and much less hatred on this planet. In travelling, there’s a whole world to gain, and nothing to lose, besides maybe your luggage. Ellie Hannum from Wilmington, N.C., travels to open her mind and gain perspective: According to the definition, traveling “is the movement of people between relatively distant geographical locations, and can involve travel by foot, bicycle, automobile, train, boat, bus, airplane, or other means”. But traveling is so much more than that. Traveling opens our minds and souls to a whole new world (cue A Whole New World music from Aladdin and montage). We travel to escape from the busy lives we are living for a short time. We travel to fill an unexplainable hole in our souls (and stomachs) that can only be filled with the diverse cultures and food around the world. I want to travel not to cross destinations off my bucket list, but to understand and learn from the people I share this world with. I do not get jealous over material things that others have, but I will admit that I am quite jealous of Jada Yuan’s job as the 52 Places traveler. Brady Hoffacker from Wilmington, N.C., looks to escape the routine of everyday life: Traveling to me is a way to get away from my daily life and let loose. It’s a way to discover different cultures, learn about history, and my favorite, try new foods. No matter where you travel there is a adventure awaiting you, hoping to allow you to dive into the country, city, or town. Traveling is my great escape and allows me to be free. I have traveled a few times out of the country and they were definitely life changing experiences, since I got to experience new language and even a new continent. The vacation I took to Europe to explore the castles of Ancient Belgium, the luxurious bagets in France, and the friendly people in the Netherlands was great and would love to do it again. IN from KOP PA wants to connect with their family’s history and culture: If I could go anywhere I would most likely go to Sweden. This is because my aunt from my mom’s side is from Sweden and I would love to learn more about her culture. At family dinners she always mentions the beautiful dances, delicious foods, and the energetic people. Going to Sweden will let me experience these things in a more memorable way. This will also allow my aunt and I to have a connection. Jessica Lee from Wilmington, N.C., would love to learn about the various wildlife and plants that inhabit the globe: My family and I usually go on trips to beaches such as in Cancun, Hawaii, and California. I love the beach and would love to try to go to the Caribbean. I would like to read about the biological differences of places around the world, such as what different types of animals that live there. Seeing wildlife around the world is so interesting because seeing how life differs through the continents shows the complexity of our planet. Our world is amazing, and I would love to travel it. Sean Harris form North Carolina travels to understand the history of the United States: I would want to travel to Montgomery, Alabama. An unpopular decision, maybe, but I am very interested in learning more about my country’s past. I would want to learn about the extreme racism and how people dealt with it. I feel that it would give me a newfound appreciation for my own life and let me see how petty some of my problems really are in comparison. Rex Hardy from Wilmington, N.C., would want to experience nature on his ideal vacation: The top two places I would most want to visit from the list would probably be Chile and Australia. I chose Chile as one of my top choices because of the incredible views and experiences I could have in their parks. I imagine kayaking through a canal for a good amount of time; probably, seeing if the fish bite. Then hiking up a mountain where I would set up camp. I would like to experience the traditional dishes that most people in Chile enjoy. Just enjoying nature and understanding the culture they have would ultimately be what I would want out the trip. I chose Australia because it is such a beautiful place that is far different from the sandy beaches here in Wilmington. The exotic animals that I’ve only seen in zoos free and out in the open. I would want to hike and see the beauty of nature while on the trip. Going off road with myself, a backpack, and a bike just being adventurous and having as much fun as I could possibly have. That’s what would make the both of these trips special. Just having fun. Finally, many readers said they would love to have Jada Yuan’s job as The Times’s very first 52 Places traveler. Meghan Miraglia from Massachusetts explained why beautifully: I would love Jada Yuan’s job. I would want to go everywhere - I would want to see the ugly and the pretty. That, I think, is the key quality of a travel writer. Don’t just tell me about the glimmering skyscrapers. Don’t just tell me of the wealthy, running in their suits and heels, their faces permanently twisted into little snarls. Don’t give me the tourist side of things, either. A good travel writer will go to the hole-in-the-wall places of the cities and towns. You cannot pop into NYC and go to the Stereotypical Places - don’t say you have seen NYC when all you have done is take selfies with the Statue of Liberty and taken the elevator up to the top of the Empire State Building. There is, for example, the best sub shop in NYC, but you’d never ever find it in a travel brochure or glossy, photoshopped guidebook. It’s a greasy little place, but poems line the walls and spraypaint art adorns the white brick, and the bathroom is a little sketchy, but the vegetarian sub is the best thing that you will ever eat. The good travel writer will see beyond the diamond-encrusted exterior of cities. The good travel writer will have conversations with strangers, will buy them coffees and ask about where the best bagels in the neighborhood are. The good travel writer will not just speak to the glorious attractions, but will also talk of the mundane, of the average, of the bits and pieces of that place that are oftentimes overlooked. _________ Image Credit Stuart Bradford Students gave very thoughtful and insightful recommendations in response to our Student Opinion question: “ What Advice Should Parents and Counselors Give Teenagers About Sexting? ” Katharine from Rhode Island lamented the double standard girls and boys experience when given advice about their sexuality: In my own experiences, I have not been pressured to send sexts. I know my case is not necessarily the norm, and I’m lucky to say that. I’ve definitely known of girls who have been pressured to send nude phtotos, even if they didn’t want to. I found that in Rhode Island, an individual can spend up to 15 years in prison, and would be registered as a sex offender, if they possessed nude photos of a minor, even if they were a minor. I’m more aware of the social ostracization that comes along with sending nudes. For women especially, sending nudes tends to result in the same sort of victim shaming that accompanies sexual assault. Basically, the sender is at fault in these interactions, for sending pictures to a person of questionable intentions. What this response fails to ignore is the unhealthy power structure between men and women. This is even more so evidence of men’s sexuality being celebrated and excused, whereas women are encouraged to virtuous and pure, which leads to their sexuality being repressed. I think the best thing we can do as a society is to stop chastising women for being taken advantage of by men. I know this is easier said than done, but I think education can definitely be a weapon against sexual discrimination. Maybe this means altering our already lacking sexual education courses; I’m not entirely sure. Still, I’m hopeful for my generation, as we are increasingly more comfortable to acknowledge the faults with our society and try to repair them. Francesca Altunyay from Wilmington, N.C., emphatically agreed: The article illustrated the problem of teenage sexuality and sexting very clearly, I think. I’ve heard numerous stories about girls who were pressured by boys they may not even know to take and send nude photos, and how they were spread to others or used as blackmail. This is a truly illuminating example of how girls get the short end of the stick in situations such as these, because while a lot of advice given about sexting consists of warning girls not to take or send sexual photos, people don’t think to look for the common cause of the problem: harassment. Such harassment is perpetrated because of the sexual power and status that men represent in our society, and is the root that stems to America’s “rape culture.” Girls are advised to not wear revealing clothing, never walk alone at night, to not get drunk, but rarely is it ever said: “Try to not sexually harass anyone, please.” Excuses such as “boys will be boys” and “men can’t control their libido” fuels and justifies much of the sexual harassment that some boys feel entitled to do. Lola Calotychos from Providence, R.I., made a connection to the #MeToo Movement: I believe this article very accurately depicts the rising sexting culture the vast majority of teens habituate. Most people have developed a distorted sense of how personal and trusting they should be with others via their devices. I know numerous teens who have had their explicit photos secretly saved by the person they sent them to, and then sent around completely out of their control. Furthermore, I know of others who have had the photos saved to their family’s iCloud, leading to unfathomably awkward conversations with their families. On a more important note though, these photos do put people at risk of legal trouble... even jail time in some cases. Moreover, I find it concerning that the statistics proving males’ higher likelihood of pressuring girls for photos of this nature is so distinct. In light of all that is going on regarding sexual misconduct, in particular the “Me Too” movement, it makes me think that — although it could not be entirely eliminated — the awareness of this issue could prevent this sexting issue, which is the “norm” in today’s world, from expanding into sexual harassment and assault such as molestation and rape. Janelly Polanco from Rhode Island spoke from personal experience: My friends and I, unfortunately, been all asked for sexual pictures. The experiences in the article were, to some extent, more extreme than what I, personally, have experienced. The harassment or pressuring with no where to turn however is something I have experienced. This is what we consider “normal” or “expected” when dealing with boys our age which, when taken into consideration, is a fail for our society. I am well aware of the social and legal consequences in regards to sexting or sending sexual photos. Although I have never been taught these consequences by a parent or teacher, media has showed me the extent of the punishment an adult could recieve when he or she is sexually involved with a minor. In society, girls are usually taught to cover themselves up or be able to defend themselves [against boys] rather than boys being taught to respect girls no matter the age. These different messages can conjure up the wrong ideas for both parties. I think parents and teachers, or adults in general should try to normalize sexting or at least acknowledge the expression sexuality in a positive, respectful light rather than leave it to the teenager to figure out for themselves. If sexuality was normalized, teens would be able to find outlets to express their sexting-related issues and ask for help. Angela from Rhode Island thought setting strict rules would not stop teenagers from sexting: I feel as though Adults should in a respectful and reassuring way state the consequences of sexting. When adolescents feel attacked I believe that that is the moment that kids act out and do as they please without thinking of how it may affect the future. However, I also believe that setting rules for asking and sending pictures would be ineffective because regardless of the amounts of rules given to kids, they will do what they want. Hannah from Pennsylvania suggested adolescents share their experiences with others: Kids need to be educated about how to say no to being pressured into sending those kinds of pictures, but much of the time they don’t listen to a teacher standing at the front of an 8th grade health class. I personally haven’t done anything like this, but I know the way that we are taught to not send pictures isn’t very impactful. I think it would serve the purpose more to have kids and teens like themselves tell their stories about how they sent or received pictures, and their consequences. That way, it all seems more real to the kids. On the other hand, if there are kids already experiencing something like this, then they should be allowed to talk to someone without being judged or persecuted because of this. They should be able to get help without any reason to feel ashamed or embarrassed. _________ Image Many students who commented on our prompt “ Can You Spot a Liar? ” said they thought they would score high on the quiz, but then didn’t do that well. Others scored high and were surprised at their results. Leah Schwagerl from Wilmington, N.C., says being a terrible liar is beneficial, because it taught her the value of the truth: Wow, I did worse than I thought I would on the quiz. I only answered 5 out of 10 correctly. On the five that I missed I was definitely skeptical of whether or not they were lying and continued to scroll back and forth between the “lying” and not lying” buttons. Generally I am a pretty trusting person, and I guess taking this quiz just further validated that. Eyes moving to one side, stuttering, and going into excessive detail or evidence about a subject can be clear clues of lying when trying to get away with something (which I find is one of the easier lies to detect). I am a terrible liar, even my siblings poke fun at me for it, but knowing I’m a terrible liar has allowed me to see the value in the truth. Aubrey Ella Hyldahl from Wilmington, N.C., made a New Year’s resolution not to lie: I think a large part of detecting lies relies on how well I know the person. I would not feel confident detecting a lie a stranger told me, unless I was on very high alert for lies. However, once I become familiar with someone, I can recognize lies for what they are. Most people do something to give it away, for example, my brother’s left eye has an ever-so-slight twitch to it in the midst of a lie. Some people also have a tendency to lie about a particular subject and exaggerate the topic. A lie worth the effort to tell is usually complex, which often results in a spider web of other supporting lies that can be hard to keep straight, leading to mix-ups and confusion. When I lie I usually do so to protect someone I care about from a truth that I think will hurt them, or because it is about something that is not my place to tell... One of my goals for the New Year was to stay away from all lies, including secrets. Lying is a way of taking the easy way that forces alliance with some and animosity with others. I am hopeful that avoiding not only lies, but rumors and gossip-which inevitably lead to lies- will allow me the opportunity to dig deeper in my relationships without the fear of getting caught in a lie or gossip. Gilber V. from Chesterfield, Va., looks at facial expressions: Learning from the facial expression and the behavior of each person can be difficult when trying to detect lies. However, this quiz shows that sometimes you can accurately tell whether a person is lying or not just by paying attention to the eye movements, their confidence while talking, and their body language. These are important, yet subtle clues that can help you come to a final judgement, but it can also lead people to make misinterpretations because of the notion of having natural skills for detecting liars. Alexis Lariviere from Hoggard High School suggests looking at our own lies for clues, and thinks there should be a foolproof method: Think about all of the times you have lied in your life, there are probably too many situations to count! Everyone lies multiple times in their life, but the real question is can you detect it? As stated in the related article, trained professionals can only spot who is lying 61% of the time. What happens to the other 39% of people who are wrongly accused?When I completed the interactive quiz, I scored 7/10. Some clues that gave liars away were eye movements, shifting, and twitches. The only problem with looking for these clues is that when people do them, it does not necessarily mean they are lying. Some people glance around the room or move naturally and they could be completely honest. There has to be a better way for detecting the authenticity of a statement. Ravi from Seattle tried the advice of an expert, and failed. In “What Every Body Says” former FBI agent Joe Navarro explains his knowledge of body language after his career in counterintelligence. His technique is to spot people exhibiting self-comforting behaviors, like scratching their nose or twiddling their thumbs, which offset the discomfort of lying. I tried this technique on the quiz, but I scored 5/10—I might as well have been guessing. Navarro makes it clear that you should never take suspicious behavior during one question as incontrovertible evidence that you are being lied to. Suspicious behaviors are signals that you should question a person further along those lines, and if your examinee continues to exhibit tranquilizing behaviors, there’s a good chance that Disneyland isn’t their favorite childhood memory. Cheyenne Newkirk from Wilmington, N.C., scored high, and thinks the key is listening: On the “Can You Spot the Liar” quiz I got all but one right, and to be honest going into this I would not have expected to get so many right. Most of them I had to take a good few seconds to figure out while others I could immediately tell if they were lying or not. I wouldn’t consider myself that good at telling lies or even knowing when someone is lying to me but I will give myself credit for being observant.Out of my group of friends I’m always the listener, the one you can come to with how you made eye contact with your crush, or how you had a terrible day. Whatever it is I like to listen, and I think that being able to spot a lie or just anything in general has a lot to with just listening. Kayla Renee from Pennsylvania knows when someone is exaggerating: I would say that I can easily tell when a person lies to me, especially if I’ve known that person for a while. Sometimes it’s the little pitch change in their voice, other times they can’t look me in the eye. Researches show that when most people lie they tend to look up to right, or if you ask them a follow up question and they hold their “no” or “yes” for a long time, it’s most likely a lie. I don’t notice those little things when I tell a little white lie, but my hands start to sweat when I’m nervous. I can tell easily when someone is exaggerating, which leads to figuring out when someone is lying. I’m a good liar spotter but if you line people up and ask me who is lying, I wouldn’t be able to tell the difference. Tiffany Morel from Rhode Island has newfound respect for professional lie-spotters: Growing up in a household where I was told to never lie, having to tell whether or not someone was lying made me realise how much telling the truth has an effect on my daily life. While I might pride myself on telling the truth, paying attention to the body language of others has always come second nature to me. I don’t stop to think if someone is lying or not, but rather just hope that they are being as honest as I am. That being said, while I was taking the quiz, having to stop and focus on whether or not someone may be lying was a bit tedious and made me earn a new respect for the people who have to deal with identifying liars on a daily basis. When taking the quiz, I based my questions on how the conversation made me feel rather than anything else and resulted in getting 9/10 on the quiz. Sadie Gaffin from Providence, R.I., found it easy: I took the quiz and I received a 9/10 on it. It is usually pretty easy to detect a lie because the person will make obvious gestures. They might look at you and then look away often if they are lying, or they might leave out necessary details, or tell to many details. Also, a lot of the time the tone of voice they use will give it away. If there is passion in their voice, they are usually being honest, however if they sound monotoned, they may be lying. On the quiz, I could tell if someone was being honest because of their tone of voice and their eye contact with the camera. _________ Image Related Article “ Space Travel ” brought in one short story, and several thoughtful comments that answered “What story could this image tell?” Olivia Lain from Wrightsville Beach, N.C., wrote the beginning of a short story: “Don’t worry, Dad, we’ll be back hours before the dust storm is supposed to hit. We’ll be fine, we’re always fine.” My dad, geologist Luke Green of the latest NASA mission was always worried that my brother Johnny and I would get into some kind of trouble collecting rocks from far-off sites like we were doing today. I know that he grew up in a time when rockets blew up and space travel was fairly dangerous, but that sort of thing hadn’t happened in years. Johnny and I hovered over to the location where we were supposed to collect our samples, and it was pristine from human impact. We were the first people over here, an experience that wasn’t that uncommon with only 100 or so people on Mars at a given time. Johnny and I are filling up our containers and analyzing our samples when I glimpse something out of the corner of my eye. Something’s is moving over there, but it’s not because of the wind. I motion to Johnny and we get a closer look. It’s a tiny, spider like creature about a half-inch in diameter. This is huge, life has never been found native to Mars, until this creature. “Kayla, what do we do?” The question comes from Johnny, and we can’t radio back to camp for some reason. We decide to put it in a container and bring it with us back to camp, but off in the distance, we see the dust storm approaching. We’d spent too much time staring at the little creature, and now we couldn’t even make it back to camp before the storm hit. What could we do? Jalen Owen from Pennsylvania took a dark view of the future: This tells a story of a post-apocalyptic future. Today, humans are obsessed with discovering new, complex forms of technology that can made our everyday lives better. However, one day, this machinery will developed too far from our power, and will start to become its own type of humanity. In the picture, we see a human-machine hybrid. This is something not too far from what scientist are trying to discover today. However, the man in the picture should watch his back because one day this machinery will developed feelings and intelligence on its own. And could start to turn on us. IN from KOP PA said time would tell: This image could show our future. I believe that one day you will find families on vacation relaxing on Mars. The women has her bags which may represent how we may even be able to live in space or other planets. The man is holding some sort of technology. This may show in the future we will have technologies that are more advanced than they are today. On the other hand this may show people testing space or planets if they are safe to travel to, but we never. Time will tell. Mitchell Boehling from Wilmington N.C., responded in detail to the article: If Buzz Aldrin at 87 years old is still willing to spread that message of humanity reaching mars if only by modeling a fashion line then that should say something about him. As David Ben-David, said in the article “Buzz was the man who gave us a taste of space in the sixties” only further shows the affect that Buzz Aldrin has had on our society. Because he’s such a large proponent of space travel to Mars it’s a shame that all he can do is model for youths clothing lines. Perhaps if he was more in the spotlight then people in positions of power might decide to fund missions sooner to Mars whether than giving very little to NASA and watching space fall into the hands of private companies like Space X. __________ Image Oprah Winfrey spoke at an Iowa rally for Barack Obama in 2007. Ms. Winfrey declared as recently as October that she would not run for office of any kind. Credit Ramin Rahimian/Reuters Our popular Picture Prompt “ Oprah for President ” brought in many emphatic “yes” answers, and equally emphatic, but fewer, “no” answers. Heather Tinsley from Wayne, Neb., was all in: Absolutely. I would say that Oprah understands the power of her words and is able to foresee the impact they will make on her audience. To say that she has no political experience is an understatement. Her experience is different. There are many aspects of her career and lifeworks that support the requirements of a high public office that would impact a nation and the world. Any person who can navigate through military, social, political, entertainment, and family issues and be seen in a positive light should be given sound consideration. Katharine from Rhode Island agreed: For Democrats, Oprah possibly represents a weapon against the Trump Administration; she is a powerful orator, a successful businesswomen, and is well-liked by the American public. Despite this, I would be wary to support her in 2020. Though I am well aware of her socially liberal stance, I am sure of little else. Similar to Trump, Oprah lacks the political experience I would want in a candidate. If Democrats want party unity and victory, I’m not sure if this is the route they should take. However, if Oprah does get the nomination in 2020, in an attempt to appeal to the majority, I may feel obligated to vote for her, just to avoid the possibility of a second term for Trump. Francis Batz-lux from Providence, R.I., likes Oprah’s positivity: I think Oprah should run for the 2020 presidential election because she is such a powerful woman. She understands the struggles that families go through in order to put food on the table. As a child, she has seen how hard her own mother would work to make sure they don’t go to sleep on an empty stomach. She will make sure that the power of the people is equally distributed and allow all people from all races to have a voice. Oprah is an inspiration for women everywhere and to become the first female president in history will make her the best role model for children everywhere. She will be able to tackle any political issue that is thrown at her and she will stand alongside the nation. This nation needs a strong leader who is willing to give their all to their people, a leader that will spread positivity rather than hate. Catherine B from Rhode Island is unsure: Having a caring, strong, intelligent, and outspoken person in the White House is very important to many people. Although Oprah fits this description, her lack of experience within politics may be troubling for Democrats and Republicans alike. It would be amazing to have a woman- [and] an African-American- in the presidential seat, but I’m not sure she’s the right fit for the job. If the DNC chose a candidate who fits these descriptions and has political experience, they would be much more successful in the long run. Nyah Price from Providence, R.I., said no: Oprah Winfrey‘s speech at the Golden Globes was both one of the most passionate and inspiring speeches that has been said in 2018. However it was just that inspirational, not presidential. I have nothing against Ms. Winfrey, but I don’t think it would be wise for her to run in 2020. While she is a very well liked person and has the resources at her fingertips to run, she doesn’t seem like the type to be in charge of our missile launch codes. I feel like Oprah is one known as someone who will take charge of the assignments she starts on, like her network. But how will that translate to running a country? We can’t just give those who are at odds with America a car and expect everything to be smoothed over. Tara Samtmann from Wilmington, N.C., gave a two-part answer to her “no.” Here is Part 1: Oprah Winfrey is a very popular and well-spoken celebrity, who has captured the hearts and minds of millions of Americans, mostly women, for decades. She has been an advocate and supporter of women and women’s rights, and many feel that she speaks for the people of America. But, if Oprah was to run for President, I feel she will capture a lot of attention, but for the wrong reasons. Her Presidential bid would become a media circus, even more than President Trump’s campaign. But Oprah, similar to the President, lacks true government and military experience. Even though both are multi-billionaires and built their wealth on successful businesses, Oprah’s rise to fame and fortune was 100% in the entertainment business. Due to this lack of experience, I do not feel Oprah should run for President. Lola Calotychos from Providence, R.I., is undecided but hopes Oprah runs: It has been established that Trump has little regard for ALL Americans, and has done nothing in hopes to unify the American people. Even after America experience a 5-year high jump in hate crimes after Trump’s inauguration, he has not addressed the unjust stigmas fueling much of the hate throughout America. From the Black Lives Matter, “Me Too” movement, and DACA Trump has not motivated the American people to embrace one another, rather, he has fueled the hate culture we live in, and seemingly ok-ed acts such as the attack in Charlottesville. From what I know of Oprah, she is someone who has consistently emulated the importance of equality and truth. Ms. Winfrey has interviewed an abundance of people — people who she praises for their admirable actions, as well as people who she questions and tries to teach. No matter who she is interacting with, she remains openminded and just; treating everyone equally. These qualities embody the very values many Americans seem to have forgotten in recent times. Oprah’s values and general intelligence would prompt the enforcement of the very words America was founded on: “every man is created equal.” So would I vote for Oprah? I’m not sure, I am not yet aware of other candidates and Oprah’s stance on more complex political issues, however, I strongly hope she runs in the 2020 election. Oprah could revolutionize society. Katy from New Brunswick, N.J., joked: Sure, but only if I’d get a car! And you! And you! And Dave from Arizona said simply: In a heartbeat! _________ Image Credit Eleanor Davis Commenters weighed in with their interpretations of our “ Stamps ” Picture Prompt. Brooke from Wilmington read it this way: This picture represents the negative effects our labeling and quick judgement have on society. The most prominent illustrating detail that I notice is the fear overtaking the faces of these people as well as the blank expressions of those who have been labelled. Labelled people have become so accustomed to these assigned labels that they don’t have the ardor to fight it anymore. Labeling has become such a huge function of our everyday society that people, myself included, can’t walk into a room without automatically making assumptions about people they know nothing about. It is these assumptions that stop people from expressing who they truly are and I think that is a major message of this image. We need to stop making people feel like a stranger in their own body. We need to accept people as they are and judge them on their character and not how they present themselves. We need to respect people’s decisions and not decide who someone is based on who they are physically. Stop the assumptions and the mislabeling, we are just destroying each other. Emma Weber from London noticed the colors: This image portrays to me the negative effect labelling has on society. Stamps with ‘HIM’ or ‘HER’ in bold lettering litter the image, holding down several people. Blue and red are the only colours in the picture, reinforcing the fact that gender can be categorised by even colour. The people in black and white makes them seem secondary to the labels that have been placed on them, which reflects how often people regard others in terms of those labels and nothing else. Once you are labelled it is hard to shake off the perceptions that come with the label, and it is even harder to change labels; we can see in the image that those who have got a label are pinned to the ground by it, and seem to be somewhat resigned to their fate. Those who are not yet pinned down by a label are obviously agitated, and are trying to avoid the stamps. I would interpret this as those in society who are not as easily held down by a label, or do not think any label defines who they are. Kayla Renee from Pennsylvania expanded its meaning to all kinds of labels: This image reflects our society today, Labels. To label something is to assign that title to them or it. People are unfairly labeled with stereotypes everyday; the jock, the preppy kid, the nerd, the popular kid. Labels are dangerous and too commonly seen in our modern day lives, with gendering as well. Everyday whether we realize it or not, we assign genders to almost everything such as shoes or bookbags and clothes. On a daily basis people assume genders, this frustrates a lot of people in our society, and we could be offending them. This pictures depicts the dangers of a label, in the picture some of the people look afraid of the stamp/label and others just seem fine, as if they were accepting their fate and it’s okay now. We are being crushed by these labels and they are starting to take over our lives. We need to strip ourselves of our labels and stop stereotyping people by the color of their skin, the length of their hair, or the clothes they wear. At the end of the day we are all humans and we all have feelings, let’s treat each other how we would like to be treated. And Anandeep from Pennsylvania explained just how detrimental these labels can be: This image shows how easily society tends to put labels on people. This can be based on their actions, looks, skin color, knowledge, or even wealth. The image emphasizes how these labels stick to a person and limit them to certain standards which are hard to escape. This could later influence how people see themselves and make it hard for them to completely express their true personality and potential since they practically have a foot being tied to a rope. Every time we use a labeling pronoun, it’s like tightening the rope until the person really can not any longer willingly move on their own. Zac Gill from Wilmington, N.C., made a connection to current events: In my eyes, and probably the eyes of many others’, this image is a commentary on gender labeling and how our society “stamps” everyone with what they deem acceptable. This comment is coming from an outsider who doesn’t quite understand the world depicted by artist Eleanor Davis, but also by someone who hopes to learn more. Within this picture, a gigantic stamp is being brought down on some people labeling them either “Him” or “Her.” Everyone in the picture has a look of distressed showing that these labels probably aren’t favored. This connects to our societies growing conversation on Gender labeling and growing division on being transgender. I agree with what’s being said with this picture and hope for a more understanding country in the years to come. While Anna Cross from Wilmington, N.C., related to it personally: How easy it is for someone to reject an entire person’s identity when they’re unable to feel and see through the eyes of the people they discriminate and ignore. The naive and disrespectful individual will say that it’s “too confusing” or “frustrating” to correctly address someone, but I can assure you it’s far more frustrating to the person that has to deal with mislabeling and discrimination than it is for the protester who fulminates against the different genders and sexualities of others. Two of my friends came out as non-binary last year, but they’re still uncomfortable with telling more than a handful of people about it. They worry about facing harassment and mockery if they tell anyone outside of the immediate friend circle, and while I respect their decision, I still wish this didn’t have to be a concern. Too often society stamps a label on a person just because they don’t “understand” how someone can be a they or change their gender. But you don’t have to understand it, because only other non-binary individuals can know what it’s like to be non-binary, and only transgender people can know what it’s like to be trans (etc.). As a modern society in the pursuit of equality, we need to be more open-minded to our fellow humans, simply because like any other citizen, they deserve just as much respect and proper treatment as everyone else. McKenzie Ingram from Wilmington, N.C., summed up the sentiments of many commenters: In this image the first thing I notice is the facial expressions and body language that these people are showing. Most of their faces are plastered with a frightened or upset expression. The next thing I notice is that the people who have been stamped, are trapped under their stamp, and those who are about to be stamped look distressed. I believe that this image is saying that by stamping labels on people, traps them in that label. When we “stamp” labels on people, it’s demoralizing them. In society today, a big topic is labels. When I see the labels in this image that say “her” and “him”, the first thing I think of that’s been a trending topic in today’s society is people who are transgender. Usually people who are against people that are transgender don’t like to call them by the pronoun they prefer. They label them and make them feel that they are only that label. But they aren’t. No one is just a label. We are all humans who have different personalities and unique features. No one should be simply known as just a label, we are all complex and way more than just a “him” or a “her”. Everyone has their own unique traits and should be known by who they are as a person, not what they are. Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              