   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Book Review Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Nonfiction When Corruption and Venality Were the Lifeblood of America By  Sean Wilentz Sept. 19, 2017 Image Jay Gould, Cyrus Field, Russell Sage and Cornelius Vanderbilt in an 1883 cartoon. Credit via Library of Congress Buy Book ▾ Amazon Local Booksellers Barnes and Noble When you purchase an independently reviewed book through our site, we earn an affiliate commission. THE REPUBLIC FOR WHICH IT STANDS The United States During Reconstruction and the Gilded Age, 1865-1896  By Richard White Illustrated. 941 pp. Oxford. $35 “The Gilded Age: A Tale of Today,” which Mark Twain co-wrote with Charles Dudley Warner, isn’t much of a novel but it has two strong features. First, a guileful character: the backwoods beauty Laura Hawkins, who falls in with a corrupt United States senator, connives her way to the top of Washington high society, beats a murder rap after a sensational trial, then suddenly dies of remorse (a fate the authors’ wives evidently insisted upon). Second, its excellent title, which remains American historians’ standard label for the fourth quarter of the 19th century. “The Republic for Which It Stands,” Richard White’s new history of that age, as well as the Reconstruction decade that preceded it, is a capacious and forceful book with a dull title — the inverse of Twain and Warner’s satire. Instead of one arresting character, White develops dozens. (Among them are two Henry Adamses, the dyspeptic historian whom you know and a Louisiana ex-slave who courageously fought white terrorists before he encouraged freed men and women to migrate en masse, first to Liberia, then to Kansas.) The Gilded Age will keep its name, but White’s book ought to worsen its already dismal reputation for sordidness and rapacity. White, who teaches at Stanford, is one of the nation’s most gifted historians, the author of several important studies of the American West, including a scathing exposé of the giant post-Civil War transcontinental railroads . Like that book, this one, the latest installment in the multivolume Oxford History of the United States , is handsomely written and dense in detail. It is also laced with an irony that sometimes focuses and sometimes plays lightly off White’s outrage at the spoliation he finds almost everywhere he looks. The age was cynical but White’s book, allowing for a lapse or two, is not. This is because he is drawn to what he describes (in a phrase borrowed from the book’s unsecret hero, the novelist and editor William Dean Howells ) as “the common” — the striving middle- and working-class America of shops and neighborhoods, churches and trade unions. These realms, too, were part of the Gilded Age. In mostly unsung ways, they expanded the public good, driven by the promise of a free-labor democracy purged of the oligarchic slavery that died with the Confederacy. Image But that promise, White demonstrates, turned out to be treacherous. The ambiguous liberal ideals of contract freedom and self-regulation that helped eradicate slavery became instruments for brute and chaotic corporate power. With the ex-slaves betrayed and the Indians conquered at last, an “uncommon” America emerged, characterized by neither the imperatives of creative destruction nor even simple greed as much as by extravagance, mismanagement and predatory flimflam. Risk-taking and rugged individualism, big business’s eternally self-proclaimed virtues, were in extremely short supply at the top; Gilded Age fortunes sprang from government subsidies, insider tips and, above all, the corruption required to get these favors. “Corruption suffused government and the economy,” White writes; it was not a distortion of the system but the system’s lifeblood. The book begins with an evocative description of the public mourning and funeral of Abraham Lincoln, whose tragic shade haunts every chapter. Lincoln would be revered as the Union’s savior and the Great Emancipator, but his envisaged “new birth of freedom” would soon enough be suppressed. White treats the decade after Appomattox (with a nod to the historian Elliott West) as the Greater Reconstruction, in which the federal government aimed to clear out the Far West as well as tame the defeated South by inculcating the virtues of free labor and economic development. White also suggests that the venality and political feebleness that ensured Reconstruction’s overthrow in the South marked the actual commencement of the Gilded Age. Linking the subjugation of the Indians with the government’s treatment (and, finally, abandonment) of the ex-slaves is meant to provoke recognition of the limits of American equality after the Civil War. Yet it leads White to pass too quickly over the fruits of Southern Reconstruction before its downfall in the mid-1870s. Backdating the Gilded Age to 1865 may explain White’s odd retrieval of the traditional malicious caricature of Ulysses S. Grant — the president who, with all his flaws and errors, did break the Ku Klux Klan — as an inept, money-struck coddler of corruption. The narrative improves at the Panic of 1873, a Wall Street disaster that initiated a five-year depression and that temporarily disgraced the Republican Party. The panic hit the railroads especially hard and helped clear the way for new titans of industry, not least the pious oilman John D. Rockefeller, a steward of the Lord who, White notes, “adamantly believed that ‘God gave me my money.’” The depression led to drastic wage cuts and stricter work rules, which touched off the great railroad strike of 1877, pitting entire working-class communities against police, state militia and federal troops. Shaken respectables thought the Paris Commune had crossed the Atlantic. The Rev. Henry Ward Beecher admonished the poor to heed God’s will and “reap the misfortunes of inferiority.” Misfortune multiplied over the next two decades while well-connected financiers and industrialists reaped staggering fortunes until an even greater depression hit in 1893. White’s account of it all is a masterly historical synthesis. American living standards briefly improved, then hit bottom after a long-term decline: In 1880, the average American-born white boy of 10 could expect to live to age 48 and grow to 5 feet 5 inches, considerably less than his Revolutionary-era great-grandfathers. And the figures were worse for blacks. (Immigrants were not included in the measurements.) In the growing big cities — where immigrants, White writes, “were creating the American future” — overcrowding, trash, sewage, human waste, animal waste and decaying carcasses bred contamination and disease. Larcenous local political machines, feeding off the graft of fee-based (which is to say semi-privatized) government, were no help; the party hacks and spoilsmen at the top of national politics produced leaders like President Rutherford B. Hayes, a man, in White’s view, “who thought that attracting opposition from nearly every direction meant that he was right.” “Common” America erupted again, in the furious strikes and local political campaigns of 1886, collectively termed the Great Upheaval, and in the labor wars at Andrew Carnegie’s Homestead steelworks in 1892 and the railroad car magnate George Pullman’s eponymous company town in 1894, all part of a crescendo of unrest unmatched in the industrializing world. White’s handling of these set pieces is especially strong, sympathetic to the commoners yet not without wit (as in his appraisal of the anarchist terrorists, “who rarely missed an opportunity to make a bad situation worse”). But the labor struggles are just a big slice of the story. There is almost nothing about the era that White fails to treat with intelligence and style, as he ranges easily from the dissipation of classical liberalism to the Lakota Ghost Dance and Wounded Knee to the antimorality tale of the accused ax-murderer Lizzie Borden. White’s book ends in 1896, with the debacle of the agrarian Populist movement and reconsolidation of a Republican Party that now worshiped the gold standard and protective tariffs. White turns to Howells to make sense of it all, and finds him “surprisingly hopeful,” glimpsing an American future that is democratic and egalitarian. But there was also, it needs remembering, the Howells who in 1894 wrote, only in part satirically, that “inequality is as dear to the American heart as liberty itself.” Here is the constant American struggle, and Richard White has related a decisive part of its history with stamina and skill. Sean Wilentz's latest book is the forthcoming “No Property in Man,” on antislavery, the Constitution and the coming of the Civil War.  A version of this article appears in print on , on Page 21 of the Sunday Book Review with the headline: Misfortunes Multiplied . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Related Coverage Liberated and Unfree Jan. 31, 2014 Image ‘Mourning Lincoln’ and ‘Lincoln’s Body’ Feb. 4, 2015 Image How the Robber Barons Railroaded America July 15, 2011 Image Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              