   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index International Business Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Common Sense Referendum in Scotland, Dissected by Investor Image "Some voters are very emotional," said Sir Tom Hunter, photographed outside Edinburgh Castle. "But I’m a businessman. I’m passionate, but I’m trying to look at the facts.” Credit Sandy Young By  James B. Stewart Sept. 12, 2014 Growing up with the name James Stewart, I never thought of Scotland as anything but independent. In our official family history, “Ten Generations of Stewarts,” written by my great-aunt, Scotland took over England — not vice versa — when a supposedly distant ancestor, King James VI of Scotland, succeeded Elizabeth I in 1603 and ruled both kingdoms. Scotland was still a sovereign nation. Although generations of intermarriage may have watered down our Scottish blood, we still proudly bear a name that’s about as common in Scotland as Smith is in America. I never saw my father in a kilt, but he had Stewart tartan ties, shirts and trousers, and the Stewart family crest hung on our wall. So I’ve had more than a passing interest in the issue of Scottish independence, which will be resolved next week with the independence referendum in Scotland. After more than 300 years of being treated like a poor relation by the English, why shouldn’t Scotland take its rightful place in the pantheon of sovereign nations? But the cause of Scottish nationalism seemed a lot more romantic and safer a few weeks ago, when polls suggested that it was doomed, like Mel Gibson’s valiant but futile quest for Scottish independence in “Braveheart.” This week, the polls shifted, the pro-independence faction surged, and suddenly, this all seems more serious. The pound wavered, the FTSE 100 index dropped and some major corporations based there, even the Royal Bank of Scotland, talked about moving their legal headquarters to England. Fortunately for anyone who cares about the issues, as opposed to the passions, of Scottish independence, Sir Tom Hunter has come to the rescue. Mr. Hunter is often described in the news media as the country’s “first homegrown billionaire,” though he told me when I reached him there this week, “I never coined that phrase.” Last month, his foundation published a book online called “Scotland’s Decision.” “This started as a private effort to educate me and my family,” Mr. Hunter said. “This decision is too important to leave to the politicians.” So he went to an array of experts and asked them to address 16 questions, starting with what effect independence would have on the economy. He said he didn’t want to rely on people with personal stakes in the outcome or who had already chosen sides. “The answers started coming in,” he said, “and I thought, why not make this available to everyone? I’m not trying to influence people. I’m trying to educate them. Some voters are very emotional. Everyone is different, and that’s democracy. But I’m a businessman. I’m passionate, but I’m trying to look at the facts.” Mr. Hunter has the wherewithal for such a project because of the fortune he built in athletic footwear, a business he started when he was 23. His father was a grocer in a Scottish village of fewer than 5,000 people. He later sold his company, Sports Division, to the British retailer JJB Sports. “I started out selling shoes from the back of a van,” he said. “Fourteen years later, I got a check for 250 million pounds. I was only 37.” Mr. Hunter said he’d always been fascinated and inspired by the example of Andrew Carnegie, who emigrated from Scotland to America in 1848, arriving penniless. He built what became the Carnegie Steel Corporation, which he sold to JPMorgan in 1901 for $480 million — many billions in today’s dollars. He spent the rest of his life giving away his fortune, notably to finance the many Carnegie libraries across the United States and, of course, Carnegie Hall, but also to support higher education in Scotland, where he maintained a castle. Mr. Hunter said he read everything by Mr. Carnegie, including his famous call to philanthropy, “The Gospel of Wealth.” One day, Mr. Hunter showed up at the offices of the Carnegie Corporation in New York, the foundation that Mr. Carnegie said he founded to “promote the advancement and diffusion of knowledge and understanding,” and asked to see its president, Vartan Gregorian. When asked if he had an appointment, Mr. Hunter said, “No, but I have the time to wait.” Video James B. Stewart discusses his own Scottish background and the economic reasons for Scots to vote for independence from Great Britain. Published On Sept. 12, 2014 Mr. Gregorian saw him. “I want to follow in the footsteps of Andrew Carnegie,” Mr. Hunter said, according to Mr. Gregorian, “and I want you to educate me.” Mr. Gregorian quoted Mr. Carnegie to the effect of “the man who dies rich dies disgraced” and “aristocracy is like potatoes — the best part is underground.” Mr. Gregorian suggested some reading material and gave Mr. Hunter the names of other people to consult. “I figured that was the last I’d see of him,” he recalled. But Mr. Hunter came back and said, “I’ve done everything you said. I’ve started a foundation and I’d like you to be on the board.” The two have remained close. Mr. Hunter suffered major financial reversals during the financial crisis, and lost a good part of his fortune. His foundation couldn’t meet all of its charitable commitments. He suggested that Mr. Gregorian resign from his foundation, saying he didn’t want to be the cause of embarrassment. Mr. Gregorian said he declined. “You’re my friend,” he told Mr. Hunter, “and I didn’t join the board because of your money. I told him he could fire me, but I wouldn’t resign.” Since then, Mr. Hunter’s fortunes have rebounded. His foundation has fulfilled all its commitments and entered into new ones, and Mr. Hunter said it had now given away about £55 million, or $89 million. He runs West Coast Capital, a private equity firm in Scotland that helps fund the foundation. “There’s still so much I want to do,” he said. And, echoing Mr. Carnegie, he added, “I don’t want to end up the richest man in the graveyard.” In contrast with many wealthy Americans, who have spent millions to pursue partisan agendas, Mr. Hunter is avowedly apolitical. Mr. Gregorian said Mr. Hunter was especially proud of the Scottish enlightenment, the period in the 18th century in which Scotland produced the writings of Adam Smith, David Hume and Robert Burns, among others, and which profoundly influenced the rest of Europe and North America. “He has no political agenda. He wants to educate people,” Mr. Gregorian said. “I told him, ‘God gave us two ears, two eyes and one tongue.’ He wants people to listen and think before they talk.” Mr. Hunter has already cast his vote by mail, but won’t say what it is. His book, “Scotland’s Decision,” is painstakingly evenhanded, but after reading the book, I have a pretty good idea how he voted. On the question of whether independence would be good for Scottish businesses, Brad MacKay, professor of strategic management at the University of Edinburgh Business School, concludes in his chapter, “A large majority of business leaders indicate that the costs and risks of independence to business outweigh the perceived benefits and opportunities that might occur.” On the question of the outlook for an independent Scotland’s economy, David Bell, a professor of economics at the University of Stirling, writes that it is not clear. There are few historical precedents, and they bear little resemblance to Scotland. But he casts doubt on the popular notion that an independent Scotland would be another Norway or Denmark, with abundant social benefits and much less income inequality, goals that many Scots say they support. Professor Bell notes that the Nordic countries’ levels of income equality have less to do with government policy than the fact that their pretax incomes are more equal. And in recent years, the Nordic countries have been buffeted by the same forces that have caused income gaps to widen in most countries, and inequality there has increased faster than in Britain. Professor Bell suggests that one way independence may benefit Scotland is if it manages to unleash “animal spirits,” quoting the economist John Maynard Keynes (an Englishman). But it’s not clear why independence would be the catalyst. “We’ve been trying to encourage a more entrepreneurial spirit here for more than 20 years,” Mr. Hunter said. “I’d say we’re a bit behind.” Even if independent, Scotland wants to keep the monarchy (which seems possible) and the pound (which is unlikely), according to the book’s experts. So why not just stay in the union? After reading Mr. Hunter’s book, I don’t see why the Scots can’t have the best of both worlds — the benefits of union with a high degree of autonomy. Whatever the outcome, “this has captured the voters’ imaginations and has caused people to debate the big issues,” Mr. Hunter said. “That’s very positive.” But next week, “one side will lose,” he said. “Some people will be jubilant, and others dejected. We’ll just have to get on with it.” A version of this article appears in print on , on Page B 1 of the New York edition with the headline: Referendum in Scotland, Dissected by Investor . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Related Coverage "Scotland's Decision," online book published by the David Hume Institute [PDF] Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              