   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Music Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Jay Z Makes a Splash at the Songwriters Hall of Fame, Without Even Being There Image Jay Z canceled his appearance at the Songwriters Hall of Fame induction ceremony on Thursday, but on Twitter posted about the event throughout the night. Credit Matt Rourke/Associated Press By  Joe Coscarelli June 16, 2017 Jay Z may not have turned up for his induction as the first rapper in the Songwriters Hall of Fame, but he managed to make the most of it anyway. At a ceremony on Thursday in Manhattan that featured the likes of Jon Bon Jovi, Berry Gordy, Ed Sheeran and Pitbull, this Brooklyn rapper, born Shawn Carter, was a presence even in absentia, noting the occasion with a microphone-drop of a video message from former President Barack Obama. “Mr. Carter and I understand each other: Nobody who met us as younger men would have expected us to be where we are today,” Mr. Obama said in the clip, calling Jay Z “a true American original” and thanking him for “making me want to be active in my retirement, as you have been in yours.” Obama #ForThePeople . pic.twitter.com/aBHdzLhNfE — deray (@deray) June 16, 2017  “I’m pretty sure I’m still the only president to listen to Jay Z’s music in the Oval Office,” Mr. Obama added, to whoops from the crowd. Jay Z, whose wife, Beyoncé, is pregnant with twins, was a last-minute cancellation for the event, which he had described as “a win for US” upon the announcement of his inclusion in February. “I remember when rap was said to be a fad,” he wrote on Twitter then. “We are now alongside some of the greatest writers in history.” Also inducted into the Hall of Fame this year: Kenneth Edmonds, best known as Babyface, who, in addition to his solo work, wrote songs for Whitney Houston and Boyz II Men; the R&B producers Jimmy Jam and Terry Lewis (Janet Jackson, Mary J. Blige); the Swedish pop mastermind Max Martin (Backstreet Boys, Britney Spears, Katy Perry); and the band Chicago’s chief songwriters, Robert Lamm, James Pankow and Peter Cetera. Mr. Gordy, the Motown founder, was honored as well, after deferring his induction last year. Instead of a speech and a performance, as is customary for inductees, Jay Z, known for hits like “Hard Knock Life (Ghetto Anthem)” and “Empire State of Mind,” returned to Twitter on Thursday night as the ceremony began. Over the course of more than an hour, he blasted out a stream-of-consciousness (and erratically punctuated) list of rappers who have inspired him, including pillars of the genre, longtime peers, oft-overlooked fan favorites, former rivals and up-and-comers. (He also referred to Mr. Obama as “the greatest rapper of all time.”) “Salute to anybody who made a song to feed their family or just vent,” Jay Z wrote, adding, “I promise I’m not drunk.” The writer dream hampton, who collaborated with Jay Z on his 2010 book “Decoded,” posted on Twitter: “Life kept Jay from giving his (very well written) speech tonight at the Songwriter’s Hall of Fame. So he’s freestyling.” While the songwriting award rarely resonates much beyond industry circles, Jay Z and his team had made plain in advance of the event how much the award meant to him, repeatedly highlighting the rapper’s induction as a significant occasion. Earlier on Thursday, a dedicated page on the website for Tidal, Jay Z’s streaming platform, called his inclusion in the Hall of Fame “the most important moment in hip-hop history.” It also collected written and video testimonials from a range of friends and collaborators including Quincy Jones, André 3000, Bono, Chance the Rapper, Alicia Keys, Mr. Bon Jovi, Pharrell Williams and Chuck D. (There was also a full-page ad congratulating him in The New York Times on Thursday.) “To finally have somebody in this culture — in this part of the game, this side — recognized, it’s long overdue, but I’m glad it’s him,” said Chance the Rapper in his video message, highlighting Jay Z’s focus over the years on encouraging artists to retain control over their publishing rights and master recordings. “You can hear his wit and hustle stylings in the backbones of some of the biggest and respected artists of today,” André 3000 added. “But even more importantly, he has verbally taught new generations how to understand their personal worth and create opportunities for others around them.” Mr. Obama hit a similar note in his speech, explaining that both he and Jay Z grew up without a father and without financial stability. “So we try to prop open those doors of opportunity,” he said, “so that it’s a little easier for those who come up behind us to succeed as well.” A version of this article appears in print on , on Page C 3 of the New York edition with the headline: Jay Z Makes Splash At Awards Ceremony . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Related Coverage Jay Z to Be the First Rapper in the Songwriters Hall of Fame Feb. 22, 2017 Image The Crooner in Chief: Barack Obama’s Musical Legacy Jan. 20, 2017 Image Jay Z and Beyoncé: Activism Gone Vocal July 8, 2016 Image Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              