   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Music Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by The National Music Museum, an Unlikely Eden in South Dakota Image Rendering of an expanded National Music Museum in Vermillion, S.D. Credit Schwarz-Silver Architects By  Zachary Woolfe Sept. 2, 2015 As you walk toward the cello believed to be the oldest in the world, the nearly 500-year-old instrument has its back turned to you. But the discourtesy grows forgivable on approach: The Amati “King” cello ’s rear side is its most seductive feature, with richly colored paintings — crowns, winged putti, columns, fleurs-de-lis, Justice hoisting a sword — that take on glowing depth beneath the varnish. On view through Tuesday at the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York, the instrument will soon head home, but not to a cultural center like London, Berlin or Paris, as you might expect. The King cello lives in Vermillion, a city of 10,692 in the southeastern corner of South Dakota. Its residence there is the National Music Museum , which is on the University of South Dakota’s campus and against the odds of geography, money, attendance and attention has one of the largest and most important collections of historical instruments in the world. A six-hour drive east from Mount Rushmore, the galleries teem with masterpieces: precious early Italian strings; one of only two surviving bass saxophones made by their inventor, Adolphe Saxe; a portable 17th-century organ with hand-operated bellows; a Gibson Les Paul guitar with a shimmering gold finish; a radiant Javanese gamelan . Surrounded by such treasures, a visitor finds it apt that the museum was, from its founding in 1973 until 2002, called the Shrine to Music. “It is the connoisseur’s dream collection,” Cleveland T. Johnson, the director since 2012, said in an interview. “Because regardless of what corner of the musical instrument world you’re looking at, you can get a pretty good cross section, a comprehensive look at what’s going on with Italian violins, or German harmonicas, or Asian zithers or whatever.” Image The 16th-century Amati “King” cello, part of the collection of the National Music Museum in Vermillion, S.D. Credit Penguin/UK, via National Music Museum As he led a tour of the museum in Vermillion, Mr. Johnson, a tall, genial specialist in historical keyboards, occasionally stopped, removed a “Please Do Not Touch” sign and played, at one point picking out a few mellow bars on what is thought to be the oldest surviving playable harpsichord (Naples, circa 1530). In between these impromptu performances, he described his vision for extending the museum’s reach despite its remote location and annual attendance of around 10,000, through a more robust program of loans and traveling exhibitions and an updating of the museum’s informative but old-fashioned website. Most important is a renovation and expansion project that aims to create a modernized setting equal to the superb collection — closer in line, say, with the vast Musical Instrument Museum in Phoenix, founded in 2010 by Robert J. Ulrich, the former chairman of Target. The expansion will preserve the Vermillion museum’s current building, a charmingly musty former Carnegie library from 1910, and take over an adjacent one, which now houses the university’s psychology department, for offices, storage and a new conservation lab. The plans call for the lawn between the two buildings to be filled with an angular, light-filled contemporary-style connecting structure that will house more galleries and a concert hall. It cost $250 million to build the Phoenix museum, which has a large, intriguing collection less distinguished than the National Music Museum’s. By contrast, the Vermillion expansion is projected at just $17 million. But while more than half of that has been raised, it’s a heavy lift. “Historically, this museum is rooted in South Dakota,” Mr. Johnson said. “Our funding base has always been local and regional.” He added: “Million-dollar gifts I can do. Five million is tough.” The National Music Museum originated with a single man, Arne B. Larson (1904-88), a beloved band director in Brookings, S.D., who was also a voracious collector. Looking for a place to deposit the more than 2,500 instruments he had accumulated, he settled on the university in Vermillion. If things had stopped there, the museum — called the Shrine to Music to complement the Shrine of Democracy , as Mount Rushmore’s sculptor, Gutzon Borglum , called his presidential heads — would be an inviting local institution. But it became far more than that. Arne’s son André, born in 1942, followed in his father’s footsteps, earning a doctorate in musicology and inheriting his passion for collecting. He founded the museum and spent his career leading it, diversifying the holdings and adding well over 10,000 instruments by courting donors and fostering relationships with dealers. In 1984 he persuaded the philanthropists Robert and Marjorie Rawlins to donate $3 million to purchase the Witten Family Collection of early Italian strings, thought to be the largest sum ever paid by a museum for a collection of antique instruments. Image A 1530 harpsichord. Credit Tony Jones/National Music Museum “It was the moment no one could say, ‘That’s this eccentric old collector out in the Plains having fun,’ ” Mr. Johnson said. “When the Witten collection came here, we were on the map.” Among the Witten highlights were three instruments built by the pathbreaking Italian maker Andrea Amati: a violin , a viola and the King cello . ( Another Andrea Amati violin was acquired in 1991, forming one of the world’s rarefied string quartets.) Originally made with three strings rather than its current four and somewhat cut down in size by a luthier at the turn of the 19th century, this cello is the earliest bass instrument of the violin family believed to survive. Around 1560, 20 years or so after its construction, it was painted to become part of a set — an early string orchestra — for the French court of Charles IX. The gilded “K” in the center rib on each side stands for his Latin name, Karolus. “It didn’t weigh very much — it was like lifting a papier-mâché cello,” the cellist Joshua Koestenbaum writes at the Met’s website of his experience playing the instrument in Vermillion in 2005. Excerpts from recordings of him on the King support this claim from an 1829 auction catalog: “The tone of this violoncello is of extraordinary power and richness.” The cello and the other instruments in what is now called the Witten-Rawlins Collection epitomize the National Music Museum’s period of avid acquisition. Those days are now over, as the institution has turned from expanding the 15,000-object collection to using it. And lending it: As Mr. Johnson said, “The reality is, if we’re going to fulfill our mission, we have to do better about sharing with a national audience.” (New Yorkers can hope for further collaborations with the Met.) But even as the museum tries to become a kind of musical Smithsonian, the nation’s home for instrumental history, it can’t quite shake its old name. “Every now and then I think the Shrine is still a good name for us,” Mr. Johnson said. “I look out across the front courtyard, and I see people coming up to the front door. It’s been on their bucket list, and particularly for musical instrument people, it’s almost like a religious experience, like they’re coming to a shrine. They’ve finally made it.” A version of this article appears in print on , on Page C 1 of the New York edition with the headline: Plucking the Strings in an Unlikely Eden . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              