   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index U.S. Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Case of Captive in Yemen Could Test Trump’s Guantánamo Pledge Image President Trump has said he intends to keep the military prison at Guantánamo Bay, Cuba, open and fill it with “bad dudes.” Credit Thomas Watkins/Agence France-Presse — Getty Images By  Adam Goldman , Matt Apuzzo and Eric Schmitt Feb. 13, 2017 WASHINGTON — The Trump administration is considering what to do about a Qaeda suspect being held in Yemen, a decision that presents an early test of President Trump’s campaign pledge to send terrorism suspects to the military prison at Guantánamo Bay, Cuba. The suspect, known as Abu Khaybar, was captured last fall in Yemen and is being held there by another country, according to four current and former senior administration officials. The circumstances of his detention are not clear, but he is wanted on terrorism charges in New York. Mr. Khaybar, who is about 40, presents an important legal and policy test for Mr. Trump, who said the Obama administration was too soft on terrorists and promised to fill the prison in Cuba with “bad dudes.” Mr. Khaybar’s suspected affiliation with Al Qaeda gives the United States clear authority to hold him in the military prison. Attorney General Jeff Sessions has repeatedly said that terrorists should not be prosecuted in civilian courts and, as recently as last month at his confirmation hearing, said the prison at Guantánamo Bay should be kept open. The case could also prompt a decision as the Trump administration is considering an executive order that would make it clear that newly captured terrorism suspects would be sent to Guantánamo Bay. The United States has not sent a prisoner there since 2008. But trying to send Mr. Khaybar to Guantánamo Bay would put the administration at odds with career Justice Department prosecutors and F.B.I. agents, who say the criminal courts have proved more adept than military commissions at handling terrorism cases. The military tribunal system has been troubled by setbacks. A decade and a half after the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attacks, none of the men charged in that plot have even gone to trial. Image Attorney General Jeff Sessions has repeatedly said that terrorism suspects should not be prosecuted in civilian courts. He favors keeping the prison at Guantánamo Bay open. Credit Al Drago/The New York Times “I think it would be extremely demoralizing to the efforts of prosecutors and law enforcement dedicated to eradicating terrorism around the world,” said Glen A. Kopp, a former federal prosecutor in Manhattan. The F.B.I. and the Justice Department declined to comment. Justice Department prosecutors have expressed confidence in internal discussions that they can win a criminal trial against Mr. Khaybar, according to one former senior Obama administration official who helped review the case. Mr. Khaybar is one of many people the United States is trying to track, capture and prosecute. Two American security officials said Mr. Khaybar’s case had come to a head first, with others expected to follow. It is not clear whether Mr. Sessions has been briefed on the case since taking office last week. Under the system in place for the last several years, President Barack Obama decided whether to bring terrorism suspects to the United States after hearing from senior officials across the government. It is unknown whether the Trump administration will follow the same process. It is also unclear how far Mr. Trump is willing to push his international counterterrorism allies. The forces of allies such as Yemen, Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates, among others, play a crucial role in the military campaign against Al Qaeda’s branch in Yemen. Many American partner nations are likely to resist being seen as helping to send a prisoner to Guantánamo Bay. Some allies, including in Europe, provide crucial intelligence to the United States and have sought assurances that their collaboration will not result in prisoners’ being sent to Guantánamo. The naval prison and the documented abuses that occurred there in the early years of the Bush administration have led to international condemnation and are recruiting symbols for terrorist groups. Little is publicly known about Mr. Khaybar, who is believed to be Sudanese. Former intelligence officials say he has longstanding ties to Al Qaeda and was affiliated with the terrorist organization when he lived in Sudan. At some point, he made his way to Somalia and then Yemen around 2015, officials said. After his capture, Mr. Khaybar’s identity was not immediately established. But eventually intelligence officials determined his name, and F.B.I. agents pushed to prosecute him in New York. Some officials said they hoped to transfer him before the end of the Obama administration, but the complexity of the case and the review process made it impossible. Along with Mr. Trump, the case will be a test for Mr. Sessions, who has inherited a Justice Department that has become accustomed to winning important cases against foreign terrorists in federal court. The F.B.I. has been working alongside commandos from the military’s Joint Special Operations Command to collect evidence, a partnership that prosecutors say gives the United States options. And prosecutors have won cooperation from admitted terrorists, such as Ahmed Abdulkadir Warsame, and that information has then been used to prosecute others and launch drone strikes. “Given the varied nature of the threats we face today, our military needs every reliable tool we can provide them,” said Brendan R. McGuire, the former chief of the terrorism unit at the United States attorney’s office in Manhattan and now a partner at WilmerHale. Under the Obama administration, the Justice Department successfully prosecuted Osama bin Laden’s son-in-law and a Pakistani-born Qaeda member who planned to carry out a bombing in Manchester, England. In 2014, a Russian jihadist fighting for the Taliban was sentenced to life in prison in the first example of a foreign combatant captured on the battlefield in Afghanistan being prosecuted in federal court. As a senator, Mr. Sessions criticized that strategy because it gave terrorism suspects the right to lawyers, the right to remain silent and the right to a speedy trial. All of those make it harder for interrogators to extract intelligence, he said. But Mr. Sessions has some wiggle room in the Khaybar case. He has said that foreign terrorists should be treated as prisoners of war “at least initially,” and then a decision could be made later “as to whether to move them in federal court.” Mr. Khaybar has been held for months in Yemen, where he is most likely subject to questioning by the local authorities. The extent of such questioning is unclear. A third option, besides Guantánamo or criminal court, would be to not seek his transfer and allow another government to handle his case. That would be an unusual move for a case involving charges in American courts.  Get politics and Washington news updates via Facebook , Twitter and in the Morning Briefing newsletter . A version of this article appears in print on , on Page A 1 of the New York edition with the headline: Qaeda Suspect Challenges Vow on Cuba Prison . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Related Coverage ISIS Detainees May Be Held at Guantánamo, Document Shows Feb. 8, 2017 Image Obama Transfers 4 From Guantánamo, Leaving 41 There as Term Ends Jan. 19, 2017 10 More Detainees Are Transferred From Guantánamo Prison Jan. 16, 2017 Image 4 Yemeni Detainees at Guantánamo Are Transferred to Saudi Arabia Jan. 5, 2017 Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              