   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Politics Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Comey’s Memos Were a Product of a Culture of Note-Keeping Image James B. Comey at a news conference last year. Credit Shawn Thew/European Pressphoto Agency By  Rebecca R. Ruiz May 17, 2017 WASHINGTON — The revelation that James B. Comey documented his interactions with President Trump — describing in detail how the president urged him to quash the federal investigation into Michael T. Flynn, the former national security adviser — provided the clearest evidence yet that Mr. Trump tried to influence the government’s inquiry into possible links between his associates and Russia. It also shined a bright light on something more commonplace: the F.B.I.’s practice of keeping careful, contemporaneous notes. For law enforcement officials like Mr. Comey, who was fired last week as the director of the F.B.I., documenting sensitive conversations is a reflex — and in keeping with the habits of diligent lawyers. Mr. Comey was a federal prosecutor and corporate counsel before he took over the F.B.I. Why do F.B.I. employees write memos? In sensitive investigations as well as in routine matters, it is standard for people who work in law enforcement to keep detailed phone and meeting logs, Lauren C. Anderson, a former top F.B.I. official, said. “That’s the culture of the F.B.I. — you habitually document everything you do,” Ms. Anderson, a 29-year veteran of the bureau, said. “As a rule, you’re not taping every conversation, so your ability to recall details in a way that can be maintained and relied on is absolutely critical.” The instinct to preserve possible evidence goes beyond the F.B.I. “The same is true in the C.I.A.,” Ms. Anderson said. “They’re meticulous in their documentation of both formal and informal communications.” Video Michael S. Schmidt, a New York Times reporter, explains new revelations from a memo written by James B. Comey, the fired F.B.I. director. The memo showed that President Trump may have tried to halt the agency's investigation into Michael T. Flynn. Published On May 16, 2017 Why keep the records? Memos such as Mr. Comey’s help reflect a level of detail documented while events are still fresh in the writer’s mind. In court, they can serve to corroborate testimony. Interactions with people who may in some way figure into an investigation — regardless of what may be discussed — could be pertinent to an inquiry and later serve as evidence. “Memos give you the flexibility to report facts as well as atmospheric impressions,” Ms. Anderson said. “It goes to his credibility,” she said of Mr. Comey. “The fact that he wrote it when it happened lends weight to it. It’s not like he wrote something last weekend and backdated it.” Mr. Comey’s memos were not the standard forms that F.B.I. agents use to summarize the facts of interviews they conduct, called FD-302s, or 302s in bureau parlance. They were a more informal way to document not just the facts of an interaction but also personal impressions and analysis to help put those facts into context. Were other memos ever so prominent? In 2007, the typewritten notes of Robert S. Mueller III, the F.B.I. director at that time, helped resolve a dispute over the Bush administration’s warrantless surveillance program. Mr. Comey, as it happens, was also involved. He testified in 2007 before a congressional committee about a series of meetings and phone conversations about the surveillance program he had in 2004, when he was deputy attorney general. Mr. Comey, who had opposed the surveillance program, had different recollections than senior White House officials, and Mr. Mueller’s notes provided key corroboration of Mr. Comey’s version of events. Mr. Comey had also documented concerns about the Bush administration’s use of brutal interrogation tactics in 2005 in emails, which were made public in part in The New York Times in 2009 . What has been the fallout? Democrats have used Mr. Comey’s memo to push again for an independent panel to investigate ties between Mr. Trump’s associates and Russia, and some even pressed for the impeachment of Mr. Trump, though many expressed caution on calling for such a drastic step. Many legal questions need to be answered first, said Representative Adam B. Schiff of California, the top Democrat on the House Intelligence Committee, including establishing Mr. Trump’s intent if he did ask Mr. Comey to end the inquiry into Mr. Flynn (which the White House denies). “It cannot serve as a method to nullify the election by other means,” Mr. Schiff said of possible impeachment proceedings. Representative Justin Amash, a Michigan Republican with a history of speaking out against his party, said that if Mr. Comey’s account was accurate, he believed it to be grounds for impeachment. The Senate Intelligence Committee and House Oversight Committee separately requested documents related to Mr. Comey’s interactions with the president; leaders of both committees also said they were poised to issue subpoenas to obtain Mr. Comey’s memo if necessary. The Senate committee also invited Mr. Comey to testify openly and behind closed doors. The White House has expressed skepticism of Mr. Comey’s characterization of his interactions with Mr. Trump, insisting that the president never asked that the Flynn investigation be shut down. “The president is confident in the events that he has maintained, and he wants the truth in these investigations to get to the bottom of the situation,” Sean Spicer, the White House press secretary, said Wednesday. “There are two investigations going on in the House and Senate, and he wants to get to the bottom of this.” Emmarie Huetteman contributed reporting.  Get politics and Washington news updates via Facebook , Twitter and in the Morning Briefing newsletter . A version of this article appears in print on , on Page A 14 of the New York edition with the headline: Memos Were a Product of a Culture of Note-Keeping . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Related Coverage Comey Memo Says Trump Asked Him to End Flynn Investigation May 16, 2017 Image 8 Reasons That G.O.P. Leaders Haven’t Deserted Trump May 17, 2017 Image Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              