   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Opinion Supported by Letters Takeaways From James Comey’s Testimony June 9, 2017 Image “Those were lies, plain and simple,” James B. Comey, the former F.B.I. director, told the Senate Intelligence Committee, discussing White House explanations for his firing. Credit Doug Mills/The New York Times To the Editor: Re “ Trump Tried to Sink Inquiry, Comey Says ” (front page, June 9): I’m a lifelong conservative Republican. Never once voted Democratic or independent. Having watched Donald Trump from the day he entered the 2016 race, I’ve come to the sobering conclusion that he is not only unpresidential, but also a narcissist who puts self before country. James Comey’s testimony confirmed for me that Mr. Trump is indeed a pathological liar. I believe that Mr. Comey is telling the truth, and that more will come out in Robert Mueller’s investigation. And whether or not it rises to a criminal or impeachable threshold for Mr. Trump, this travesty has distracted our leadership from the business of running this country. So, for the sake of my children, your children, for every American, let’s please come together and do something about what’s happening to our democracy. JIM GRIDER, ST. PAUL To the Editor: James Comey is afraid to stand up and tell President Trump, “Mr. President, this is wrong!” Instead, he makes detailed notes of the privileged conversation and leaks his one-sided view of what was being said to a law professor at Columbia University, who forwards it to a reporter for a front-page story in The Times to build the case for a special prosecutor. Impeachment is a political calculation, and despite the outcry from the liberals who lost the 2016 presidential election, a Republican Congress is not going to impeach its leader. Yes, the Russians tried to disrupt the election, but I have seen no evidence that Mr. Trump tried to collude with the Russians. It was the voters of Michigan, Pennsylvania and Wisconsin who put Mr. Trump in the White House, not the Russians. DENNIS L. BREO NEW SMYRNA BEACH, FLA. To the Editor: Re “ Trump Sees ‘Total and Complete Vindication’ in Comey’s Testimony ,” nytimes.com, June 9): Either President Trump doesn’t understand the seriousness of the situation or he once again is the master of mendacity and obfuscation. Yes, he is not under investigation at this time in connection with Russia’s meddling in the election. But numerous people on his team are, and who knows where that investigation will lead? At the beginning of Watergate, Richard Nixon was not under investigation. It was only when the tapes were revealed that the evidence indicated Mr. Nixon’s involvement. So it’s too early for Mr. Trump to crow. Then there’s the possibility of an obstruction of justice charge, which James Comey’s testimony has made more likely. Again, either Mr. Trump doesn’t understand the seriousness of this or he is, as he is wont to do, diverting attention from this issue. RONALD L. HIRSCH, BROOKLYN To the Editor: If a reasonable definition of a Washington leak is the unauthorized release of information, how can anyone suggest that James Comey, the former F.B.I. director, “leaked” a memo when he was the author of that memo (and, not incidentally, was a private citizen at the time of the release)? The fact that the release was through a friend does not make it a “leak” any more than when a source speaks to a reporter without attribution. DESMOND J. M. WHITNEY MINNEAPOLIS To the Editor: Re “ For Trump, a Looming ‘Cloud’ Just Grew That Much Darke r” (news analysis, front page, June 9): “I can definitively say the president is not a liar,” Sarah Huckabee Sanders, the principal deputy press secretary, told reporters. The laughter heard ’round the world. ED GALLARDO SUN CITY WEST, ARIZ. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page A 22 of the New York edition with the headline: Takeaways From Comey’s Testimony . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              