   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Weddings Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Mara Sloan, Benjamin Boroughs Image Sept. 3, 2017 Mara Daile Sloan and Benjamin Bryan Boroughs were married Sept. 2. The Rev. Danny R. Reed performed the ceremony at the Unitarian Church in Charleston, which is in Charleston, S.C. Mrs. Boroughs, 31, was until last week a communications director in Washington for Representative Al Lawson, a Florida Democrat. Later this month, she is to become the communications director for the Democratic Legislative Campaign Committee, also in Washington. From 2016 to 2017, the bride was a senior media relations adviser at the United States Agency for International Development, working in Washington. She graduated from the University of Florida. She is the daughter of Elise H. Sloan of St. Augustine, Fla., and Mark H. Sloan of Charleston. Her father is the curator for the Halsey Institute for Contemporary Art in Charleston. Her mother retired as a clinical psychologist at Cape Fear Valley Medical Center in Fayetteville, N.C., and now manages social media for the St. Augustine Yacht Club. The bride is also the stepdaughter of Michelle Van Parys. Mr. Boroughs, 30, is in training to become a foreign service officer for the Foreign Agricultural Service, which is a unit of the Agriculture Department in Washington. He is now the agency’s desk officer for Japan and Korea. From 2012 to 2014, he was the legislative correspondent for issues on agriculture, environment and energy policy, in Washington, for Senator Amy Klobuchar, a Minnesota Democrat. The groom graduated from Texas A&M University and received a master’s in international science and technology policy from George Washington University. He is the son of Diana L. Boroughs and Bryan B. Boroughs of Cimarron, Kan. The groom’s mother is a substitute teacher in southwest Kansas. His father is a senior agronomist for Servi-Tech, a crop consulting cooperative with headquarters in Dodge City, Kans. The couple met in April 2014, at a Nationals baseball game in Washington, which both attended with a large group of mutual friends, though they didn’t begin dating until after Mr. Boroughs attended a jeans shorts party hosted by Ms. Sloan in August of that year. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page ST 14 of the New York edition with the headline: Mara Sloan,  Benjamin Boroughs . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              