   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Opinion Supported by Letters The Inquiry Into the Collusion and Spying Claims March 20, 2017 Image The F.B.I. director, James B. Comey, testified before the House Intelligence Committee on Monday in Washington. Credit Eric Thayer for The New York Times To the Editor: At the hearing of the House Intelligence Committee on Monday, Representative Adam B. Schiff of California, the ranking Democrat, succinctly recounted the “coincidences” about Donald Trump’s operatives’ contacts with Russian intelligence. When you hear them all together like that, it’s really damning. Up until now I allowed Mr. Trump a tiny bit of benefit of the doubt. No longer. I am convinced that the Trump campaign actively colluded with the Russians to deny Hillary Clinton the presidency. And that is an impeachable offense. JOHN DIEHL, SAN FRANCISCO To the Editor: The F.B.I. director, James Comey, who improperly influenced the election, investigates whether the Russians did? ILYA SHLYAKHTER CAMBRIDGE, MASS. To the Editor: Re “ Britain Furious as Trump Pushes Claim of Spying ” (front page, March 18): How long do we as a nation have to mollify Donald Trump in his accusation that former President Barack Obama tapped his phone at Trump Tower? Why isn’t it enough that our intelligence agencies, leaders of both the House and Senate Intelligence Committees, and even an anchor from his favorite resource, Fox News, have said there is no evidence? Now Mr. Trump has added insult to insult by involving the chancellor of Germany, and angering our closest ally, Britain, by saying it might have wiretapped him, an idea he got watching a “very talented legal mind” on Fox News. One can just imagine President Vladimir Putin’s satisfaction at this international rupture and its destabilizing effect as Mr. Trump offends our most important allies to perpetuate a lie. Mr. Trump seems to think it’s a show of strength or power to refuse to apologize when you are not only clearly wrong, but clearly lying. Instead, it makes him look like a petulant, inept fool who lacks the strength of character to take responsibility. Now that his lie has caused an international incident, are congressional Republicans going to finally put country first? Will they, out of a sense of decency, admit that a lie is a lie, and show outrage at a president who either doesn’t care about or can’t recognize the truth? JANE RUPERT, HUNTINGTON, N.Y. To the Editor: Since President Trump is unable and other American officials are unwilling, I offer my deepest apologies to Chancellor Angela Merkel of Germany and Prime Minister Theresa May of Britain, and our other friends around the globe. Our president has made irresponsible, inaccurate and unsubstantiated claims many times in the past and continues to do so to his own citizens. Add to these the rudeness and lack of respect for you and your countrymen — I am ashamed. I believe that I speak on behalf of the majority of United States citizens. CATHERINE ROTHMAN NORFOLK, VA. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page A 28 of the New York edition with the headline: Inquiry Into Collusion and Spying Claims . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              