   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Politics Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Longest State of the Union? Not Quite, but Trump’s Was Long Image President Trump’s first State of the Union address was also one of the longest in the last 50 years, outlasting all but two of President Bill Clinton’s. Credit Doug Mills/The New York Times By  Maggie Astor Jan. 30, 2018 Whatever you thought of President Trump’s first State of the Union address, one fact is indisputable: There was a lot of it. One hour and 20 minutes long, it was the third-longest State of the Union in the past 50 years. In that time, only President Bill Clinton has spoken for longer: 1 hour, 28 minutes, 49 seconds in 2000, and 1 hour, 24 minutes, 58 seconds in 1995, according to the American Presidency Project at the University of California, Santa Barbara. Transcript: Trump’s First State of the Union Speech, Annotated New York Times reporters analyze the 45th president’s prepared remarks. Jan. 30, 2018 In fact, only three of the past nine presidents exceeded an hour in any of their speeches. Lyndon B. Johnson did it once (1 hour, 11 minutes, 16 seconds in 1967), and Barack Obama did it four times (peaking at 1 hour, 9 minutes, 20 seconds in 2010). No one, however, has matched Mr. Clinton, who did not deliver a single State of the Union address under an hour. His average? One hour, 14 minutes, 51 seconds. We will have to wait for the transcript to see whether Mr. Trump spoke more than his predecessors, or simply slower. In terms of word count, the longest spoken State of the Union in American history was Mr. Clinton’s 1995 address, at 9,190 words. Written State of the Union Messages — the norm until the early 20th century — were often much longer. Related Coverage First Trump State of the Union Address Makes Appeal for Unity Jan. 30, 2018 Image Trump’s First State of the Union Address: A Call for Unity That Wasn’t Always Heard That Way Jan. 30, 2018 Image What Were Those Purple Ribbons For at the State of the Union? Jan. 30, 2018 Image Some Supporters Fear Trump Will Lose Hard Edge in State of Union Speech Jan. 29, 2018 Image Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              