   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index U.S. Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Efforts to Curb Police Abuses Have Mixed Record, and Uncertain Future Image Mayor Rahm Emanuel of Chicago spoke at a news conference about police abuses, flanked by Attorney General Loretta Lynch and Eddie Johnson, the police superintendent. Credit Scott Olson/Getty Images By  Shaila Dewan and Richard A. Oppel Jr. Jan. 14, 2017 Looking to the federal government to rein in police excesses can be an exercise in managed expectations. On Friday, Chicago agreed to revamp its police department after the Justice Department found routine use of excessive force, and the mayor said he would negotiate a court-enforced settlement, known as a consent decree. But that is no guarantee of results — and not just because the man most likely to be the next attorney general has said he is skeptical of such endeavors. Attempts to force change in police departments have met with mixed success even under the Obama administration, which made police reform a signature issue. It has opened 25 investigations into law enforcement agencies over issues like excessive force, racial bias and poor supervision, issuing reports choking with outrage . Los Angeles, which was under a consent decree for 11 years, is regarded as one of the great success stories. “Los Angeles is a different place today because of the consent decree and the leadership of the department,” said Chuck Wexler, the executive director of the Police Executive Research Forum, a Washington think tank. In Detroit, which emerged from a 13-year consent decree last year, officer shootings and warrantless arrests have declined significantly. But Pittsburgh, the target of the first consent decree based on a Justice Department finding of a “pattern and practice” of misconduct, later backslid after changes in leadership, said Samuel Walker, a criminal justice professor at the University of Nebraska at Omaha. And while Miami reduced police shootings to zero for 20 months after a federal investigation in 2002 that was later closed with no settlement, the Justice Department in 2013 reinvestigated and found a pattern of excessive force with firearms, underscoring some experts’ view that consent decrees or other settlements are needed for enduring improvements. Last year, Miami settled the 2013 inquiry by agreeing to improve supervision, training and internal investigations. The “pattern and practice” approach developed after the Rodney King beating in Los Angeles in 1991 forced a period of national introspection over how to curb misconduct if individual officers could not be held accountable. A jury’s decision not to convict the four officers charged in the attack on Mr. King incited deadly riots. Since the early attempts, Mr. Walker said, consent decrees have evolved to be more sophisticated and comprehensive. “The general pattern is that there is some backsliding on some issues,” he said, “but I don’t think there’s a case where a department has completely collapsed back to where it was before.” Video The Justice Department issued a report on Friday that cited systemic civil rights abuses by the Chicago Police Department. The findings come as the department tries to overhaul nearly two dozen police departments nationwide. Published On Jan. 14, 2017 Credit Image by Scott Olson/Getty Images Still, Senator Jeff Sessions, Republican of Alabama and the nominee for attorney general under President-elect Donald J. Trump, called them “dangerous,” writing in 2008 that they “constitute an end run around the democratic process.” At his confirmation hearing this past week, he softened that critique, saying there were some circumstances that legitimately demanded consent decrees and that those already in place would be enforced. But, Mr. Sessions said, lawsuits could unfairly target whole police departments for the misdeeds of a few bad actors. “These lawsuits undermine the respect for police officers and create an impression that the entire department is not doing their work consistent with fidelity to law and fairness,” he said. His critique did not extend to how well consent decrees actually work. But experts say that even systemic changes, like greater oversight of officers’ use of force, can be slow to yield results. “They change the ‘inputs’ through training, record keeping, community involvement and other internal reforms, but the inputs don’t necessarily translate into changes in ‘outputs’ including racial disparities, use of force, or other constitutional issues,” wrote Jeff Fagan, a Columbia University law professor, in an email. “The results have been quite variable.” Consent decrees can span years and many of the Obama administration’s key settlements have just begun, including those in Cleveland and Albuquerque. So it would be premature to assess their success. Some reform advocates have expressed fears that the Trump administration will fail to investigate police departments or enforce consent decrees, robbing them of what they view as a crucial lever to compel change. Even some police chiefs might mourn a retreat from consent decrees. Baltimore’s police commissioner, Kevin Davis, has said that a consent decree would aid community relations. Charles H. Ramsey, who as Washington’s police chief invited the Justice Department to review his department, said, “The DOJ gives legitimacy to the changes that you’re making.” Chiefs may want consent decrees in order to insulate them from political and union opposition to change, as well as make it easier to demand money to pay for reforms. Mr. Sessions wrote in his critique of consent decrees in 2008 that he is aware of that strategy. “Such decrees are particularly offensive when certain governmental agencies secretly delight in being sued because they hope a settlement will be reached resulting in the agency receiving more money,” he wrote. “Thus, the taxpayers ultimately fund the settlement enacted through this undemocratic process.” A version of this article appears in print on , on Page A 15 of the New York edition with the headline: Agreements to Curtail Excessive Force by Police Have a Mixed Record . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Related Coverage Chicago Police Routinely Trampled on Civil Rights, Justice Dept. Says Jan. 13, 2017 Image Justice Dept. Report on Chicago Police Dept. Jan. 13, 2017 Image For Chicago Police, Many Complaints but Few Consequences Dec. 17, 2015 Image Show All Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              