   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Politics Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Sessions Rejects Republican Calls for Second Special Counsel Image Attorney General Jeff Sessions said an existing Justice Department inquiry already included an examination of the surveillance of a former Trump aide, obviating the need for a special counsel. Credit Doug Mills/The New York Times By  Katie Benner March 29, 2018 WASHINGTON — Attorney General Jeff Sessions rejected on Thursday a request from Republican lawmakers to appoint a special counsel to investigate allegations by conservatives that Justice Department officials abused their authority in surveilling a former Trump campaign official. In a letter to three congressional committee chairmen , Mr. Sessions said an existing Justice Department inquiry into issues raised earlier by the lawmakers included an examination of the surveillance matter, obviating the need for a special counsel. He identified John W. Huber, the United States attorney in Utah, as the prosecutor leading that investigation and stressed that he welcomed lawmakers’ scrutiny. “I take the concerns you raise seriously,” Mr. Sessions wrote, adding, “No institution is perfect.” Nonetheless, his decision not to appoint a special counsel, at least for now, is almost certain to disappoint Republicans. Even after the announcement a day earlier that the Justice Department inspector general is also examining the allegations , lawmakers reiterated their calls for a special counsel. President Trump had demanded last month that Mr. Sessions turn to Justice Department lawyers, not the inspector general, to investigate accusations of surveillance abuse. The department had told lawmakers in November that senior prosecutors were examining a variety of issues, including allegations related to the Clinton family foundation. Included in that inquiry, Mr. Sessions wrote on Thursday, was the surveillance of the campaign official, Carter Page, who served as a foreign policy adviser during Mr. Trump’s presidential run. The wiretap of Mr. Page has been at the heart of attacks on the Russia investigation by Mr. Trump, Republican lawmakers and conservative commentators, who have assailed the inquiry as an effort by federal law enforcement officials to undercut Mr. Trump. They have said the application to spy on him, submitted to the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court, relied on information from Democrat-funded research without being fully forthcoming about its source. But congressional Democrats, in a memo intended to rebut those claims, have said that the F.B.I. was clear about the source of the information and that it was only part of a larger set of evidence to support a wiretap. Law enforcement officials have long suspected that Mr. Page, a former investment banker in Moscow, was a Russian agent and interviewed him about his contacts with Russian intelligence agents during the same month Mr. Trump brought him aboard his campaign. Mr. Sessions addressed the letter to three Republican lawmakers who have called for a second special counsel: Charles E. Grassley of Iowa, the chairman of the Senate Judiciary Committee; Robert W. Goodlatte of Virginia, the chairman of the House Judiciary Committee; and Trey Gowdy of South Carolina, the head of the House Oversight Committee. The department’s inspector general, Michael E. Horowitz, is also to expected to release in the coming weeks the results of another high-profile investigation into the conduct of F.B.I. and Justice Department officials during the 2016 presidential campaign, when it was investigating both Hillary Clinton’s handling of classified information while secretary of state and ties between Russia and Trump associates. The latter inquiry is now the purview of the existing special counsel, Robert S. Mueller III. That coming report prompted the firing this month of Andrew G. McCabe, the former F.B.I. deputy director, hours before he was eligible to retire. Nicholas Fandos contributed reporting.  Get politics and Washington news updates via Facebook , Twitter and the Morning Briefing newsletter . A version of this article appears in print on , on Page A 14 of the New York edition with the headline: Sessions Spurns G.O.P. On Special Counsel . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Related Coverage Justice Dept. Will Be Investigated Over Surveillance of Trump Campaign Official March 28, 2018 Image Justice Dept. to Weigh Inquiry Into Clinton Foundation Nov. 13, 2017 Image 2 Weeks After Trump Blocked It, Democrats’ Rebuttal of G.O.P. Memo Is Released Feb. 24, 2018 Image Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              