   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Politics Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Trump Indicates Tweet on Tapes Was Meant to Affect Comey Testimony Image President Trump at a rally in Cedar Rapids, Iowa. Credit Stephen Crowley/The New York Times By  Maggie Haberman June 23, 2017 WASHINGTON — President Trump appeared to acknowledge on Friday that his earlier tweet hinting of taped conversations with James B. Comey was intended to influence the fired F.B.I. director’s testimony before Congress. In an interview, the president emphasized that he committed “no obstruction” of the inquiries into whether his campaign colluded with Russia. Hours later, Mr. Trump accused the Obama administration of failing to prevent or punish Moscow for meddling in last fall’s presidential election before the vote. It was not immediately clear if Mr. Trump was admitting for the first time that he now believes Russia interfered in the election, just a day after he ridiculed that intelligence assessment as a Democratic “ HOAX .” During the Friday morning interview with “Fox & Friends,” Mr. Trump sought to explain that his tweets lambasting Mr. Comey were referring to the possibility that anyone could have taped those discussions. On Thursday, he admitted that he, himself, had not . “I’ve been reading about it for the last couple of months, about the seriousness of the horribleness of the situation with surveillance all over the place,” the president said in the interview. “So you never know what’s out there. But I didn’t tape, and I don’t have any tape and I didn’t tape.” When the Fox interviewer suggested that the possible existence of recordings might have made sure Mr. Comey “stayed honest in those hearings,” Mr. Trump paused before responding, “Well, it wasn’t very stupid, I can tell you that.” He also said that once Mr. Comey faced the possibility that tapes of their conversations existed, “I think his story may have changed.” By Friday evening, Mr. Trump had shifted his frustration in the election inquiry — upon which his critics have seized, and which he sees as an effort to undermine the legitimacy of his presidency — toward the Obama administration. “Just out: The Obama Administration knew far in advance of November 8th about election meddling by Russia,” Mr. Trump tweeted , shortly before 9 p.m. “Did nothing about it. WHY?” He appeared to be referring to a Friday report in The Washington Post that detailed months of internal debate within the Obama administration over how to punish Moscow for hackings that ultimately sought to boost Mr. Trump’s candidacy. Mr. Trump himself noted — and ridiculed — concerns of Russian election meddling in the weeks leading up to the vote. In a Sept. 26 debate against Hillary Clinton, the Democratic presidential nominee, Mr. Trump speculated that election hacking could be directed by Russia, China or “someone sitting on their bed that weighs 400 pounds.” During the Fox interview, the president also raised questions about the impartiality of Robert S. Mueller III , the former F.B.I. director who was named special counsel for the Russia investigation after Mr. Comey was fired. “He’s very, very good friends with Comey, which is very bothersome,” Mr. Trump said. Mr. Trump repeatedly refused to say whether he believed Mr. Mueller would have to recuse himself from the inquiry. The president is said to have railed in private about Mr. Mueller to aides and has said he wants to leave open the option of firing him . Mr. Trump said “there’s been no collusion, no obstruction — and virtually everybody agrees to that,” and he added that some of Mr. Mueller’s legal team had supported Mrs. Clinton. The president closed on a more positive note, saying, “Robert Mueller’s an honorable man, and hopefully he’ll come up with an honorable solution.”  Get politics and Washington news updates via Facebook , Twitter and in the Morning Briefing newsletter . A version of this article appears in print on , on Page A 14 of the New York edition with the headline: The President, on His Tweet: ‘It Wasn’t Very Stupid’ . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Related Coverage Trump Says He Did Not Tape Comey Conversations June 22, 2017 Image Robert Mueller, Former F.B.I. Director, Is Named Special Counsel for Russia Investigation May 17, 2017 Image Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              