   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Music Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Critic's Notebook Swinging the Vote: Jazz Inspired by the Presidential Race Image The first lady, Michelle Obama, at an event celebrating International Jazz Day at the White House in April with, from left, Terrence Blanchard, Bobby Watson, Dee Dee Bridgewater and Herbie Hancock. Credit Zach Gibson/The New York Times By  Nate Chinen Nov. 2, 2016 Nine months ago, when the term “election fatigue” had a much more hypothetical ring, the jazz pianist Marcus Roberts released a digital EP titled “Race for the White House.” It consisted of a handful of compositions inspired by the presidential field, each a character portrait in brief. The first track, with a frisky vamp that vaguely evokes the old “Batman” TV theme, was “Making America Great Again (All by Myself),” a brisk distillation of brand identity for the candidate who would later declare, of an ostensibly broken system: “I alone can fix it.” The second song shifted between Latin and swinging rhythm, in both major and minor keys. Its ringing gospel tone conveyed a touch more solemnity of purpose, but with an implied note of critique embedded in the title, “It’s My Turn.” Mr. Roberts was first out of the gate, but he hasn’t been alone among jazz artists engaging with this year’s presidential race. The trombonist Delfeayo Marsalis has a new album called “Make America Great Again!” — not an endorsement of a particular campaign, though you’d have to listen to know that for sure. Ted Nash, a saxophonist, takes a loftier and less topical approach on “Presidential Suite: Eight Variations on Freedom,” which he’ll perform next Tuesday and Wednesday at Jazz Standard, with live updates on election night. Image Ted Nash, who will perform his “Presidential Suite: Eight Variations on Freedom” at Jazz Standard next week. Credit Sara Krulwich/The New York Times These examples stand slightly apart from the typical show of political affiliation in jazz, which brought us “ Jazz for America’s Future ,” a benefit concert for the Hillary Clinton campaign at Symphony Space on Wednesday. Nor are they viral stunts, like the fragment of a Donald J. Trump speech transposed to the tenor saxophone by Dan Felix. Instead, a work like Mr. Nash’s “Presidential Suite” attempts to soar above the fray. The suite is his response to eight famous passages of political oratory, like Ronald Reagan’s “Tear down this wall” speech in West Berlin. On the album, each passage is read by a celebrity guest, and then a big band plays a movement patterned after the speech’s inflections and cadences. Mr. Nash knows how to work this device to his favor, moving beyond gimmickry while preserving flashes of folksiness and wit. (He brackets “ The American Promise ,” based on a 1965 speech by Lyndon B. Johnson, with a moseying-cowboy riff.) Image Marcus Roberts, who released a digital EP titled “Race for the White House” nine months ago. Credit Adrian Ruiz De Hierro/EFE, via European Pressphoto Agency Still, it’s hard to hear the many calls for unity in this rhetoric — speeches not only by American presidents, but also by figures like Nelson Mandela and Winston Churchill — without reflecting on current divisions. The album begins, after a brief overture, with an excerpt from John F. Kennedy’s inaugural address, recited by Joseph I. Lieberman, the former senator. “So let us begin anew,” Mr. Lieberman says, “remembering on both sides that civility is not a sign of weakness, and sincerity is always subject to proof.” Civility, sincerity: By the light of this year’s bitter slog, the sentiment feels cruelly satirical. Satire is more of a stated objective for Mr. Marsalis and his Uptown Jazz Orchestra. “Make America Great Again!” features spit-and-polish big-band arrangements played with jostling flair, from the rhythm section up. The album includes social commentary, notably on the title track , delivered in an arched-eyebrow patter by the actor Wendell Pierce. “A melting pot of diversity fighting a juggernaut of adversity,” he says over a gutbucket two-step, summing up the song’s moral worldview. Image From Left: Wynton Marsalis, Branford Marsalis and Delfeayo Marsalis, in 2011. Delfeayo Marsalis has a new album called “Make America Great Again!” Credit Chad Batka for The New York Times In addition to being a presidential election year, 2016 happens to be the centennial of Albert Murray, a critic and scholar who wrote vibrantly about jazz as an expression of the democratic ideal. It hardly seems an accident that the musicians in this discussion all have formal or familial ties to Jazz at Lincoln Center, an institution Mr. Murray helped create, and one that still bears his stamp. Mr. Nash is a longtime member of the Jazz at Lincoln Center Orchestra. Mr. Roberts is an alumnus. The organization is led by Delfeayo Marsalis’s older brother Wynton Marsalis, who has editorialized on jazz as a metaphor for the American experiment. (Wynton Marsalis plays a trumpet solo, garrulous and breezy, on “Presidential Suite.” Branford Marsalis — the eldest brother, a saxophonist — similarly pops up on Delfeayo Marsalis’s album as a guest.) Tellingly, none of the orations in “Presidential Suite” can be traced to the campaign trail. And despite some efforts to strive for bipartisanship, there’s a liberal undercurrent to Mr. Nash’s album, just as there’s a foundation in African-American protest literature in Mr. Marsalis’s. What’s left unspoken on both albums, and on “Race for the White House,” is the reluctance with which a jazz constituency approaches the end of Barack Obama’s presidency. The music has had an unusually hospitable reception from his administration, up to and beyond a glittery concert at the White House, the marquee event of International Jazz Day this spring. “Jazz is perhaps the most honest reflection of who we are as a nation,” President Obama said that evening. “Because after all, has there ever been any greater improvisation than America itself?” A version of this article appears in print on , on Page C 6 of the New York edition with the headline: Swinging the Vote: Jazz Inspired by This Year’s Presidential Election . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Related Coverage Global Flavors and Asides to Obamas at White House Jazz Gala April 30, 2016 Image The Blues? Overcoming Hard Times Through Swinging Elegance May 20, 2016 Image Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              