   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Politics Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Vic Gold, Hard-Charging G.O.P. Spokesman and Campaigner, Dies at 88 Image Vic Gold in 1964, during Barry Goldwater’s presidential campaign. Credit Associated Press By  Sam Roberts June 9, 2017 Vic Gold, a pugnacious political spokesman who helped pave the way for modern conservatism by making Barry Goldwater less opaque to the press in the 1960s and collaborating with Spiro T. Agnew to lambaste the news media for liberal bias in the ′70s, died on Monday in Alexandria, Va. He was 88. The cause was complications of an infection, his daughter Paige Gold said. As spokesman for Senator Goldwater during his 1964 presidential campaign and for Vice President Agnew, and as an author, columnist and blogger, Mr. Gold was “one of the great publicists of the conservative movement,” the columnist Quin Hillyer wrote on National Review’s website this week. He was also one of the indefatigable characters in a bygone era of retail politics. A wiry bantamweight and lapsed Democrat, Mr. Gold was a picture of combustibility redeemed only by a jaundiced wit and a commitment to keeping the traveling press corps glued to his candidate at any cost. Once, when Goldwater left a Dallas hotel by car ahead of schedule without the regular retinue of reporters, Mr. Gold frantically sought out his mild-mannered boss, Paul F. Wagner, to inform him. “Paul took a puff on his cigar,” Mr. Gold recalled. “ ‘Then,’ he said, ‘throw yourself in front of the car.’ ” Mr. Gold had done worse. During the 1972 Nixon-Agnew presidential campaign, reporters regaled one another with stories of Mr. Gold “screaming horrible threats at cars in the path of the press bus,” as Timothy Crouse wrote in “The Boys on the Bus,” his classic campaign-trail chronicle from 1973. “Vic terrorizing press-bus drivers who fell behind the motorcade,” he continued. “Vic becoming so deranged he distractedly pounded the assistant press secretary over the head with a rolled-up newspaper.” When the campaign ended, veterans of the Agnew press plane gave Mr. Gold a straitjacket as a going away present, Mr. Crouse wrote, “because Gold tended to fly into quasi-psychotic rages at the slightest provocation.” But, arguably, Mr. Gold was crazy as a fox. To whatever degree he was volcanic, his theatrics were, in part, a manifestation of his perspicacity. He viewed his mission as vital for two reasons: Believing in the cause, he wanted the candidate’s message delivered (“Gold had joined the campaign to help Goldwater save Western civilization,” Theodore H. White wrote in “The Making of the President, 1964”), and, unlike many of his counterparts, he understood the press’s professional responsibility. In the case of Goldwater and Agnew, Mr. Gold’s mission was particularly challenging since both were largely enigmas to the national press corps, and Agnew would hurl barbs (“nattering nabobs of negativism,” for one) at the very news media that Mr. Gold was courting. But he soldiered on for his candidates. As Mr. White wrote, “He carried their bags, got them to the trains on time, outshouted policemen on their behalf, bedded them down and woke them up, and before they knew it, the correspondents, about 95 percent anti-Goldwater by conviction, had been won to a friendship with the diminutive intellectual which spilled over onto his hero. “At the end, the correspondents permanently assigned to Goldwater were almost protective of him and felt guilty each time they must report those things they could not avoid reporting.” Goldwater lost to President Lyndon B. Johnson in a landslide but would remain Mr. Gold’s political hero. Not so Agnew. When Agnew pleaded guilty to tax charges in a corruption scandal and resigned, Mr. Gold, who had defended him, felt betrayed by “a man who once held the trust of millions of Americans.” “Millions, that is, of shnooks like me.” Victor Gold was born on Sept. 25, 1928, in East St. Louis, Ill., to Jewish immigrants. His father, Hymie, a longshoreman and a union shop foreman, came from Romania. (He was also a compulsive gambler, which was why the family had to take in boarders now and then.) His mother, the former Cissy Newmark, was from London. The family moved to New Orleans, where Mr. Gold graduated with a bachelor’s degree in history from Tulane University. He worked as a reporter for The Birmingham News in Alabama and earned a law degree from the University of Alabama. Besides his daughter Paige, he is survived by his wife, the former Dale Solomon; another daughter, Jamie Gold; a son, Stephen; two grandchildren; and a great-grandson. After serving in the Army during the Korean War, Mr. Gold joined the Washington public relations firm Selvage & Lee in 1958 and worked for a number of political candidates, including the New York state senator John J. Marchi, a Republican, in his unsuccessful campaign to unseat John V. Lindsay as mayor of New York City in 1969. Mr. Gold never minced words. When Gerald R. Ford was the House minority leader, he asked Mr. Gold to write a foreign policy speech. When Mr. Gold showed him a draft, Mr. Ford agreed with the substance but objected to the length of the sentences. As Mr. Gold recalled, he replied, “A foreign policy speech needs a certain tone,” and “tone doesn’t come in salami slices.” Hiring Mr. Gold meant always having to say you’re sorry, it seemed. Agnew and the elder George Bush, for whom Mr. Gold was a speechwriter when Mr. Bush ran for president and then a presidential adviser, were among those who apologized to him for some slight, real or imagined, to keep him from quitting. He finally quit Agnew’s office for good in January 1973, about nine months ahead of the vice president, and became a full-time writer for Washingtonian magazine and other publications. He was also an author, writing “I Don’t Need You When I’m Right: The Confessions of a Washington PR Man” (1975) and “PR as in President” (1977). Years later he collaborated with Mr. Bush on his autobiography, “Looking Forward” (1987), and wrote a novel, “The Body Politic” (1988), with Lynne V. Cheney, chairwoman of the National Endowment for the Humanities and the wife of Dick Cheney, the future vice president. The novel was a thriller in which a vice president dies while having sex with a TV reporter. Mr. Gold kept a photo of Mr. Cheney in his study, inscribed to “the only other man who could have co-authored a book with my wife!” He and Mr. Cheney fell out, though, over the war in Iraq. In his book “Invasion of the Party Snatchers: How the Holy-Rollers and the Neo-Cons Destroyed the GOP” (2007), Mr. Gold wrote: “A vice president in control is bad enough. Worse yet is a vice president out of control.” In the same book, he described President George W. Bush as “the weakest, most out of touch president in modern times,” and compared him to the often-disparaged vice president in the first Bush administration. “Think Dan Quayle in cowboy boots,” he wrote. In 2016, on the eve of Donald J. Trump’s nomination, Mr. Gold announced that he was leaving the Republican Party. He wrote on his blog that the party had been hijacked by the religious right and by “Luddites” of the Tea Party, and he described Mr. Trump as “a megalomaniacal nut case” who had tried to muzzle the news media. If Mr. Gold hyperbolized at work and drove press-bus drivers to distraction with his temper, he was apparently no better at home. After one tantrum too many, his daughter Paige recalled, when he and his wife were dating, she once left him. Until, that is, she began dating another man and took a car trip south with him. As the man was driving sedately at five miles below the speed limit, and taking what seemed like forever, she realized her mistake and the pace of life she was missing. She called Mr. Gold and the couple got back together.  Read more obituaries and follow our coverage on Twitter . A version of this article appears in print on , on Page A 28 of the New York edition with the headline: Vic Gold, Hard-Charging G.O.P. Publicist, Dies at 88 . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              