   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Opinion Supported by Letters The Questions Jeff Sessions Didn’t Answer June 14, 2017 Image Attorney General Jeff Sessions testifying on Capitol Hill on Tuesday. Credit Al Drago/The New York Times To the Editor: Re “ Sessions Denies Collusion, Deploring ‘Detestable Lie ’ ” (front page, June 14): During Tuesday’s hearing, Attorney General Jeff Sessions claimed that he was confused by “a rambling question” posed by Senator Al Franken during his confirmation hearing that caused him not to mention meetings with the Russian ambassador, Sergey Kislyak. Mr. Sessions repeatedly said he could not remember details of meetings that occurred just a few months ago. Mr. Sessions leads the Justice Department. Presumably he has to read legal briefs, which in their own right are confusing. If he becomes muddled by questions from senators, how are we to feel confident in his ability to oversee an entire department? C. K. KERNS JACKSON HEIGHTS, QUEENS To the Editor: Your June 14 editorial “ Jeff Sessions Clams Up in Congress ” most compellingly asks, “Why, since he agreed with the committee that Russian interference in the election represents a profoundly serious attack on American democracy, has Mr. Sessions never received or read any detailed briefing on that operation?” This disturbing pattern of inaction points to either gross incompetence or a bewildering lack of curiosity, as exemplified several times in his testimony: Mr. Sessions says he discussed getting rid of James Comey after the election but before the inauguration. If Mr. Comey was doing such damage to the F.B.I., why did Mr. Sessions wait six months to recommend his removal? Mr. Sessions claims to have never discussed Russian hacking with the Russians, even when he met them in his office. Mr. Sessions apparently never asked Mr. Comey what President Trump said when he cleared the room to be alone with Mr. Comey. Mr. Sessions couldn’t cite a specific Justice Department policy preventing him from reporting conversations with the president. How could he not have been prepped to answer this most fundamental question? Mr. Sessions testified that he “in effect” recused himself from the Russia investigation his second day in office, but didn’t actually do so for another three weeks. Why not? Mr. Sessions apparently seizes up as well as clamming up. RICK ROTH, SEATTLE To the Editor: The thing I cannot understand is why so many officials, like ducks in a row, are sacrificing themselves for President Trump, even people like H. R. McMaster, Dan Coats and Adm. Michael Rogers, who have had long careers and credibility, readily damaging themselves, looking as if they’re lying or hiding evidence for a president who has no loyalty except to himself and who would throw them under a bus without thinking. There is no reward here. And what is the worst that would happen to them if they stood up for what’s right? Mr. Trump would fire them. And then they would be heroes. It is a sad spectacle of misjudgment. Jim Mattis and Rod Rosenstein seem to be the only ones trying to hang on to their honor. We will see how far that goes. REVA COOPER, BROOKLYN A version of this article appears in print on , on Page A 24 of the New York edition with the headline: The Questions Jeff Sessions Didn’t Answer . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              