   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Arts Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Robert Caro and Carnegie Hall: Revisiting the ’60s Image Robert Caro at his office in New York, where a typewritten outline of the final volume of his Lyndon B. Johnson biography is tacked to a cork board. Credit Michael Kirby Smith for The New York Times By  Jennifer Schuessler Jan. 11, 2018 Robert Caro has been knee-deep in the day-by-day minutia of the 1960s for years, ever since Lyndon B. Johnson crossed the decade’s threshold in the fourth installment of Mr. Caro’s mammoth, multivolume biography . His Manhattan office is something of a time capsule of the decade, from the vintage Smith-Corona Electra 210 on which he still types up his handwritten drafts to the battered suitcases stuffed with photocopied documents stacked by the door. Mr. Caro is working on the fifth, and final volume, which focuses on Johnson’s presidency, including the disaster of the Vietnam War. But now he’s taken some time out for a somewhat unexpected role: inspiration for a 10-week, citywide cultural festival organized by Carnegie Hall. “The ’60s: The Years That Changed America” officially kicks off on Sunday, with WNYC’s annual free event at the Apollo Theater honoring Martin Luther King’s Birthday. The festival will feature nine musical performances at Carnegie Hall (including, on Jan. 19, the world premieres of two specially commissioned works, inspired by Dr. King’s “I Have a Dream Speech” and by the writings of Studs Terkel, to be performed by the Kronos Quartet), as well as more than 50 concerts, exhibitions, dance performances, film screenings and other events at 35 institutions across the city. Carnegie Hall has its own rich ’60s history, including debuts by Sviatoslav Richter (1960), Lenny Bruce (1961), Bob Dylan (1961), the Beatles (who played there twice in one day in 1964), Leontyne Price (1965) and Joni Mitchell (1969). Dr. King gave what would be his last public speech there on Feb. 23, 1968, during a centennial celebration for W.E.B. Du Bois. Several weeks later, the civil rights activist Robert Moses stepped onstage before a performance by Duke Ellington and His Orchestra to announce that Dr. King had been shot. The festival is less musically focused than previous Carnegie festivals (like last year’s installment dedicated to the Venetian Republic ), but instead gestures outward toward the era’s broader political and cultural convulsions. “People talk a lot about the ’60s,” Mr. Caro said, “but they don’t really realize what they are.” This week he talked about the festival, the decade and the homestretch of his biography. Here are edited excerpts from the conversation. You’ve spent decades minutely chronicling American politics. How did you get involved with a festival viewing the decade through the lens of art and culture? Clive Gillinson [Carnegie Hall’s executive and artistic director] and I have lunch, and generally wind up talking about politics and government. One day about two years ago, he said to me, “Do you have an idea for a festival? Go home and think about it.” I said: “I don’t have to think about it. The ’60s.” Image “People talk a lot about the ’60s,” Mr. Caro said. “But they don’t really realize what they are.” He has inspired “The ’60s: The Years That Changed America,” a new cultural festival organized by Carnegie Hall. Credit Michael Kirby Smith for The New York Times This year brings a raft of big 50th anniversaries, like the Tet offensive, the Columbia student demonstrations , the assassinations of King and of Robert Kennedy. It’s become commonplace to say we’re living through a similar, if less bloody, period of tumult. What parallels do you see? When you read the paper every night, so much of what is under assault right now — women’s rights, gay rights, voting rights, Medicare and Medicaid, a more open immigration policy — got started or reached a new intensity in the 1960s. In my book, I’m writing about Johnson passing all these bills, while on the front pages every day they are trying to dismantle these bills. This is an era where there is so much thought that government is bad. I’m writing about a time when people thought government was a force for good. This is the first time Carnegie Hall has turned to a figure outside of the musical world to help plan one of its festivals. What are some of the artistic moments from the ’60s that have stuck with you? To me, it’s the protest music. I’ve written about what to me is the supreme moment showing the power of music to create social change, which was when Johnson took the title of the most important anthem in his 1965 televised address to Congress a week after the Selma march, when he called for passage of a voting rights act. “It’s not just Negroes,” he said, “but really it’s all of us, who must overcome the crippling legacy of bigotry and injustice. And we shall overcome.” The president of the United States takes the key line of the anthem, and uses it to help push the bill through. That’s the power of music. There are events relating to protest music, but also performances of more avant-garde work like George Crumb’s “Black Angels,” a harrowing musical response to the Vietnam War (complete with whispers, shouting and extreme percussion), to be performed by the Friction Quartet at Zankel Hall on March 24. Are there other events that leap out at you? The Guggenheim is showing the first [comprehensive] American retrospective of Danh Vo, a Danish artist born in Vietnam whose work looks at social change there after the war, which opens Feb. 9. I’m also really impressed by the New York Public Library’s exhibition on the counterculture , which opens Jan. 19. They are showing manuscripts from Jack Kerouac and Allen Ginsberg, and a typescript of Bob Dylan’s “Changing of the Guards.” They have all these antiwar posters, and material relating to the Black Panthers. They even have Timothy Leary’s notes on his LSD trips . We associate the ’60s with the counterculture and protests against government. But that was also when the National Endowment for the Arts and the National Endowment for the Humanities, so often under attack in recent years, were established. Johnson was the moving force behind both of those agencies. Obama knows my books, and when he put the National Humanities Medal around my neck in 2010, I thought, “There are two people in this room who know how this got started.” Kennedy famously invited Robert Frost and Pablo Casals to the White House. Richard Nixon avidly screened movies .  What were Johnson’s personal tastes in the arts? Did he have any favorites that might surprise us? I’m going to ask you to give me a pass on that. I haven’t written that chapter yet! The ’60s: The Years That Changed America Jan. 14 through March 24 at locations around the city; carnegiehall.org.  A version of this article appears in print on , on Page C 2 of the New York edition with the headline: Carnegie Hall and Robert Caro Revisit the ’60s . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Related Coverage Robert Caro’s Big Dig April 12, 2012 Image In ‘Black Power!,’ Art’s Political Punch and Populist Reach April 6, 2017 Image Ken Burns and Lynn Novick Tackle the Vietnam War Sept. 1, 2017 Image Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              