   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Politics Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Sessions to Toughen Rules on Prosecuting Drug Crimes Image Attorney General Jeff Sessions plans to toughen rules on prosecuting drug crimes. Credit Jim Lo Scalzo/European Pressphoto Agency By  Rebecca R. Ruiz May 9, 2017 WASHINGTON — Attorney General Jeff Sessions is expected to soon toughen rules on prosecuting drug crimes, according to people familiar with internal deliberations, in what would be a major rollback of Obama-era policies that would put his first big stamp on a Justice Department he has criticized as soft on crime. Mr. Sessions has been reviewing a pair of memos issued by his predecessor, Eric H. Holder Jr., who encouraged federal prosecutors to use their discretion in what criminal charges they filed, particularly when those charges carried mandatory minimum penalties. The policy under consideration would return the department to the era of George W. Bush. In 2003, Attorney General John Ashcroft ordered the nation’s prosecutors to bring the most serious charges possible in the vast majority of cases, with limited exceptions. Mr. Sessions could, however, craft his own policy that does not go quite so far; a draft is still being reviewed. Mr. Sessions, who cut his teeth as a young prosecutor in Alabama during the height of the crack epidemic, came to office promising to make being tough on crime a top priority, and his new guidance on charging and sentencing would be the strongest articulation yet of his emphasis on a law-and-order agenda. In contrast to Mr. Sessions’s views on drug crimes, the Obama administration pushed for more lenient and flexible sentencing laws and presided over the first decline in the federal prison population in a generation. Current and former government officials have said for weeks that Mr. Sessions’s new policy could come at any time. They said Tuesday that they expected to see it finalized shortly, and Mr. Sessions himself has foreshadowed the announcement this year, calling for a return to tougher federal charging policies in speeches and issuing memos telling prosecutors to anticipate policy shifts. “As the attorney general has consistently said, we are reviewing all Department of Justice policies to focus on keeping Americans safe and will be issuing further guidance and support to our prosecutors executing this priority — including an updated memorandum on charging for all criminal cases,” Ian Prior, a Justice Department spokesman, said Tuesday. Mr. Sessions’s directives to United States attorneys would replace guidance issued by Mr. Holder in 2010, when he told prosecutors not to feel compelled to seek the most serious viable charges in every case. “Equal justice depends on individualized justice,” Mr. Holder wrote, wiping clean Mr. Ashcroft’s 2003 orders to pursue “the most serious, readily provable offense in all federal prosecutions” and emphasize consistency in drug cases. In 2013, Mr. Holder further directed federal prosecutors to avoid seeking mandatory minimum sentences, suggesting that in certain cases they omit details about drug quantities from charging documents so as not to prompt automatically harsh penalties. “We must ensure that our most severe mandatory minimum penalties are reserved for serious, high-level, or violent drug traffickers,” he wrote in 2013 . “Too many Americans go to too many prisons for far too long and for truly no good law enforcement reason.” Mr. Holder has said his policies were intended to reduce taxpayer spending on prisons and other public safety costs and to ease inequities in the justice system by scrutinizing the circumstances of each case rather than applying one-size-fits-all punishments of the toughest variety. Mr. Sessions has argued that the Obama administration’s less aggressive approach toward prosecuting drug cases has inspired other crimes. “Many violent crimes are driven by drug trafficking and drug trafficking organizations,” he wrote in a March 8 memo that underscored his scrutiny of the issue. “We do have strong evidence that aggressive prosecutions of federal laws can be effective in combating crime,” he wrote, attributing a rise in the number of murders in the United States to a decline in prosecutions for violent crimes. “Our department’s experience over decades shows these prosecutions can help save lives.” Sonja B. Starr , a law professor at the University of Michigan who specializes in criminal sentencing, said that even if Mr. Sessions were to return to the policies of the Ashcroft era — instructing prosecutors to pursue the strictest charges and sentences — there might not be drastic changes in how prosecutors handle drug cases. “There’s still a lot of discretion left to prosecutors to determine what is readily provable,” Ms. Starr said. “Under any regime, whatever the Department of Justice policy, the choice is made by individual prosecutors.” Still, she said, should Mr. Sessions push for a uniformly strict posture in prosecuting drug crimes, it would mark a significant shift in tone. “Many advocates think there are too many mandatory minimums, and that federal charging in general is still too harsh, even after the shift in policy under Holder,” Ms. Starr said. “But this isn’t especially surprising given what we know about the attorney general and the president and their view on criminal justice.”  Get politics and Washington news updates via Facebook , Twitter and in the Morning Briefing newsletter . A version of this article appears in print on , on Page A 1 of the New York edition with the headline: Drug Lenience Of Obama Era May Be Ending . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Related Coverage Sessions Closed Sterling Case. Odds Are, His Predecessor Would Have, Too. May 4, 2017 Image Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              