   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index New York Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by De Blasio, Seeking Second Term, Wins an Easy Victory Image Mayor Bill de Blasio addressing the crowd in Brooklyn on Tuesday. He will now focus on the Nov. 7 general election. Credit Hilary Swift for The New York Times By  William Neuman Sept. 12, 2017 Mayor Bill de Blasio coasted to a decisive win on Tuesday in the Democratic primary in New York City, as he moved closer to securing a second term. Facing a group of underfinanced, little-known rivals, Mr. de Blasio received 74 percent of the vote. His main opponent, Sal F. Albanese , a lawyer and former city councilman making his third bid for mayor, received 15 percent. Mr. de Blasio will now focus on the general election, on Nov. 7, when he will face the Republican candidate, Nicole Malliotakis , an assemblywoman from Staten Island, and Bo Dietl , a former police detective running as an independent. Image Mayor Bill de Blasio, after casting his Democratic primary vote on Tuesday in Park Slope, Brooklyn. Credit Joshua Bright for The New York Times “Tonight we took another big step toward a fairer city for all, tonight another ratification of all that we’ve been doing together and it’s going to give us the fuel to go farther,” Mr. de Blasio said at a victory party in Brooklyn, naming some of his achievements, including universal prekindergarten classes, a two-year rent freeze for rent-regulated tenants and a sharp reduction in the stop-and-frisk policing tactic. With no major Democrat willing to take on the incumbent mayor, the contest had all the urgency of a preseason football game, generating tepid interest among voters. Turnout was relatively low: About 435,000 Democrats voted, the third lowest total since at least the mid-1960s. That could be attributed in part to a lack of strong contests in other races. Popular incumbents hold the other two citywide elected positions, public advocate and comptroller, and sit in the five borough president seats. In the general election, the mayor will again enjoy significant advantages. Democrats outnumber Republicans by more than six to one among New York City voters who designated a party affiliation. Image Sal F. Albanese, at a campaign stop last month, failed in his third bid to capture the Democratic nod for mayor in New York City. Credit Kirsten Luce for The New York Times And in the most recent campaign finance report, Mr. de Blasio indicated that he had nearly $5 million in the bank. Ms. Malliotakis had just $220,000, and Mr. Dietl had $269,000. Mr. de Blasio has received about $5 million in donations and $2.8 million from the city’s generous public financing program for campaigns, which gives candidates a six-to-one match for the first $175 contributed by New York City residents. And he stands to receive another sizable injection of matching funds ahead of the general election. Ms. Malliotakis has not yet reached the fund-raising threshold to receive matching funds; Mr. Dietl is not participating in the program. With 97 percent of electronic scanners reported, Mr. de Blasio received 320,812 votes. Michael Tolkin, a technology entrepreneur, got less than 5 percent; Robert Gangi, a police reform activist, got 3 percent; and Richard S. Bashner, a Brooklyn community board leader, got 2 percent. In the only other citywide Democratic primary on Tuesday, the public advocate, Letitia James, handily beat her challenger, David Eisenbach, a Columbia University professor allied with Mr. Albanese. She will run in November against the Republican candidate, Juan Carlos Polanco. Image Nicole Malliotakis, who did not have a Republican primary opponent, will face Mr. de Blasio in November. Credit Drew Angerer/Getty Images The comptroller, Scott M. Stringer, a Democrat, did not have a primary challenger. He will run in the fall against Michel J. Faulkner, a Republican minister. Given Mr. de Blasio’s strong advantage heading into November, political analysts warned that the mayor must now try to generate interest in the general election contest. “There is a danger that turnout can be low in November, and that’s what he has to be concerned about,” said Charlie King, a Democratic political consultant, pointing to disenchantment with Mr. de Blasio among some sections of his liberal base, as well as missteps and distractions that clouded some of the achievements of his first term. “He’s got a good two months to begin to unclutter the minds of New Yorkers and adequately send a message of why he deserves another four years.” Rick Fromberg, Mr. de Blasio’s campaign manager, said the mayor would emphasize his successes and would continue to position himself as the defender of New Yorkers against the policies of President Trump that threaten immigrants and key urban programs. That will give him a cudgel against Ms. Malliotakis and Mr. Dietl, both of whom voted for Mr. Trump. Before the primary, Mr. de Blasio’s campaign was already sending emails tying Ms. Malliotakis to the president. Image Bo Dietl hopes to defeat Mr. de Blasio as an independent in November. Credit Sam Hodgson for The New York Times “He’ll keep pounding away at Trump to energize that base,” said William F. B. O’Reilly, a Republican political consultant, adding that Mr. de Blasio was also likely to stick to a typical incumbent’s strategy of ignoring his opponents whenever feasible. “He’ll try to stay mayor and not mayoral candidate to the best he can.” Opponents have criticized Mr. de Blasio for his antagonistic approach to the president, saying they would emphasize trying to work with Washington; questioned his work ethic; and accused him of not doing enough to improve the city’s beleaguered subway system. Ms. Malliotakis emerged as the lone Republican candidate after a wealthy real estate executive, Paul J. Massey Jr., dropped out of the race and Mr. Dietl botched his voter registration so that he could not run on either the Democratic or Republican lines. For Ms. Malliotakis, regardless of her chances of winning, the simple act of running for mayor brings benefits, raising her profile, introducing her to Republican donors and making her a more formidable candidate in the future, should she decide to run for some other office. Mr. Dietl has made himself the loudmouthed class clown of the mayoral campaign, labeling the mayor, who is nearly 6 feet 6 inches tall, “Big Bird” and heckling him at some of his events. Despite losing the Democratic primary, it appeared that Mr. Albanese would still be on the mayoral ballot in November: He declared victory in a primary for the ballot line of the tiny Reform Party, in which fewer than 7,000 votes were cast. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page A 22 of the New York edition with the headline: De Blasio Coasts to Primary Victory, Moving Closer to a 2nd Term . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              