   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Television Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Review: ‘She’s Gotta Have It’ on Netflix Is a Bold Reboot From Spike Lee Image DeWanda Wise in “She’s Gotta Have It” on Netflix, a TV reboot of Spike Lee’s debut film. Credit David Lee/Netflix By  James Poniewozik Nov. 22, 2017 At the start of Spike Lee’s 1986 breakthrough debut, “ She’s Gotta Have It ,” the artist Nola Darling (Tracy Camilla Johns) sits up in bed, filmed in cool black and white. “I want you to know,” she says, “the only reason I’m consenting to this is because I wish to clear my name.” At the start of Spike Lee’s series “ She’s Gotta Have It ,” arriving Thursday on Netflix, the artist Nola Darling (DeWanda Wise) sits up in bed, filmed in bold color. “I would like you to know,” she says, “the only reason I’m doing this is ’cause folks think they know me. They think they know what I’m about, and the truth is, they don’t know me. ” It’s the same, but different: sharper, more pointed. “She’s Gotta Have It” is full of quotes, from literature, music, history — above all, from “She’s Gotta Have It,” the film. (The song “ Nola ,” written for the film by Bill Lee, the director’s father, is not only the series’ title music but also Nola’s ringtone.) But the 2017 model is more than the sum of its references. More expansive than interior, more defiant than dreamy, it’s a vibrant if uneven work in heated conversation with itself. Even in a boom time for remakes and revivals, it’s unusual to see a vaunted director using TV for a do-over. The original film was a low-budget, high-voltage jolt about a free spirit who refused to be judged for her sexuality. It also had its own sexual-representation problems, particularly an ugly rape scene that Mr. Lee has since regretted, saying, “I was immature.” This year’s Nola is still seeing a trio of men. Jamie Overstreet (Lyriq Bent), an investment banker semi-separated from his wife, is mature but paternalistic; Greer Childs (Cleo Anthony), a model and photographer, is gorgeous but vain; Mars Blackmon (Anthony Ramos, “Hamilton”), an update of Mr. Lee’s basketball-obsessed B-boy of Nike commercial fame, is childlike but childish. Image Anthony Ramos as Mars Blackmon in the new Netflix series “She’s Gotta Have It.” Credit David Lee/Netflix (About Mars: though Mr. Lee has revised the character — making him part Puerto Rican, for instance — it’s still jarring to see anyone else don his mega-spectacles and step, in 2017, into an icon so throughly associated with mid-80s culture. It’s a little like unretiring Michael Jordan’s jersey.) But this time, Nola’s work is as much the story’s throughline as her sexuality is, and the two are bound together. Art is her means of self-assertion and self-defense. After a frightening and violent run-in with a harasser, she creates a series of street posters (“My Name Isn’t Baby Girl”) inspired by the real “Stop Telling Women to Smile” series by Tatyana Fazlalizadeh, the show’s art consultant. Mr. Lee directs every episode, as evidenced by the direct-to-camera monologues and dolly shots. But he shares writing duties with a staff that includes several women, among them the playwright Lynn Nottage and Joie Lee, Mr. Lee’s sister (who also plays Nola’s mother), and the scripts are attuned to the nuances of sexism. Great Movies by Black American Directors Hollywood’s diversity problem has been getting some needed attention in recent years, but black American filmmakers have been making great movies since the dawn of cinema. See all the titles in this collection on Watching, The New York Times’s TV and movie recommendation site. Nov. 22, 2017 The season’s five-hour run allows time to build out the supporting characters. Opal (Ilfenesh Hadera), who in the film was an opportunistic lesbian siren, becomes a more rounded character with a romantic past, and perhaps future, with Nola. Not every expansion works. A subplot about butt augmentation is a bad misfire, both scolding and flippant; a digression into Jamie’s marriage is dull. As often on Netflix, less story would have been more, and the tone swings from stagy to naturalistic to over-the-top satirical. But Ms. Wise is a unifying presence: Her forward, fiery portrayal couldn’t be better timed for a cultural moment of women clapping back at harassment. Brooklyn too is changed: white hipster waiters with fulsome beards serving artisanal cocktails, black old-timers getting “We Buy Homes for Cash!” fliers jammed under their doors. Yet Mr. Lee can’t help but shoot this Fort Greene as lovingly as the graffiti-painted Brooklyn of 1986. The camera here bursts with affection: for the moment, for the past, for black culture, for Nola, for art. Mr. Lee punctuates scenes with album covers of his soundtrack choices, like a vinyl enthusiast showing off his collection. There’s also grief, when the season — set in 2016 — mourns the election of Donald J. Trump and throws a bittersweet wake for Prince. Like David Lynch’s “ Twin Peaks: The Return ,” this series feels partly like a career retrospective. There are some of the gentrification concerns of “ Do the Right Thing ”; the nostalgia of “ Crooklyn ”; the bludgeoning satire of “Bamboozled.”(The show even works in a complaint about Denzel Washington’s not getting an Oscar for “Malcolm X.”) It also shows how Mr. Lee’s toolbox has filled over three decades. His reprise of the climactic Thanksgiving dinner with Nola and her lovers is more playful and ambitious, as if he’s nudging his younger self across the decades: Can you do this, kid? But the scene that sticks with me comes the episode before. Nola stands in front of one of her works, a self-portrait in multiple images, captioned with an Audre Lorde quote. “If I didn’t define myself for myself,” it says, “I would be crunched into other people’s fantasies for me and eaten alive.” Music starts playing — Meshell Ndegeocello’s “Faithful” — and Nola begins … revolving. The camera focuses on her, then her portrait, then her again. Finally, she throws her head back and wails, and words spill onto the screen — “Flesh,” and “Trust,” and the names of her lovers, and “Myself.” It’s transfixing. It’s daring. It is, maybe, a bit much. But Mr. Lee keeps taking in his subject, turning and turning, waiting a little longer to catch her from every angle. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page C 1 of the New York edition with the headline: Spike Lee’s Bold Reboot . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Related Coverage A New ‘She’s Gotta Have It’: Spike Lee’s Feminist Breakthrough Nov. 17, 2017 Image The Culture Caught Up With Spike Lee — Now What? Nov. 21, 2017 Image Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              