   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Opinion Supported by Editorial A Roadblock to the Court for Neil Gorsuch By  The Editorial Board March 24, 2017 Senate Republicans had to know there would be a price for their unprecedented theft of President Barack Obama’s final Supreme Court pick last year. On Thursday, Chuck Schumer, the Senate minority leader, named it : Either find 60 votes to overcome a filibuster of President Trump’s extremely conservative nominee, Judge Neil Gorsuch, or find another, more moderate choice. The last four Supreme Court nominees — two from Mr. Obama and two from President George W. Bush — all met the 60-vote threshold, Mr. Schumer said, so it was fair to require the same of Judge Gorsuch. Image Senator Chuck Schumer at a press conference last week on Capitol Hill. Credit Eric Thayer for The New York Times Judge Gorsuch is clearly qualified for the court, and for the most part he handled himself smoothly over 20 hours of mind-numbingly predictable hearings before the Senate Judiciary Committee. There’s also no question he would be a conservative vote on many of the most pressing issues facing the court, including abortion and reproductive rights, gay rights, religious liberty, gun-safety legislation, protections for workers and the environment, the flood of private money into political campaigns and more. Despite his insistence that he would approach every case with an open mind, his record strongly suggests he would rule the way Republicans would like in most, if not all, cases. Over three or four decades on the court, he would help push the law further to the right in many areas. In a speech on the Senate floor, Mr. Schumer pledged to vote against Judge Gorsuch because, he said, “his career and judicial record suggest not a neutral legal mind but someone with a deep-seated conservative ideology.” The best rationale for the filibuster, however, is the outrageous behavior of Mr. Schumer’s Republican colleagues, who refused even to consider Judge Merrick Garland, Mr. Obama’s highly qualified choice to fill the vacancy created by the death of Justice Antonin Scalia, in February 2016 — solely to hold the seat open for a conservative judge. If all Republicans voted to end the filibuster of Judge Gorsuch, they would still need the help of eight Democrats, an unlikely scenario. And it’s hard to imagine that they would agree to a different nominee. They have a third option, of course: changing the Senate rules to eliminate the filibuster for Supreme Court justices, thus ending debate — and confirming Judge Gorsuch — with a simple majority. Senate Democrats eliminated the filibuster in 2013 for lower federal court judges and executive branch appointments, after years of Republican blockades of qualified nominees for those jobs. But they left the filibuster of Supreme Court nominations intact, and rightly so: The nation’s highest court has immense power over all Americans’ lives, and its nine members should have to meet basic thresholds of bipartisan support. President Trump has nevertheless urged Senate Republicans to kill the filibuster for good, and Mitch McConnell, the majority leader, has said it would be justified by what the Democrats did in 2013 — conveniently ignoring the fact that Republicans threatened to do the same in 2005. While eliminating the filibuster would pay off for Republicans salivating for Judge Gorsuch right now, they might keep in mind that one day, perhaps sooner than they expect, they will be in the minority again, and then they’ll be stuck with one rule of politics they can’t change: What goes around comes around.  Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter (@NYTOpinion), and sign up for the Opinion Today newsletter . A version of this article appears in print on , on Page A 22 of the New York edition with the headline: Roadblock to the Court for Neil Gorsuch . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              