   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Briefing Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Asia and Australia Edition Paul Manafort, Kevin Spacey, Catalonia: Your Tuesday Briefing By  Charles McDermid Oct. 30, 2017 查看简体中文版 查看繁體中文版 Good morning. Here’s what you need to know: Image Credit Win McNamee/Getty Images • President Trump’s former campaign chairman, Paul Manafort, and a former associate were indicted on charges of money laundering, tax fraud and foreign lobbying, the first handed down by Robert Mueller, the special counsel investigating Russian links to the Trump campaign. Our reporters are annotating the court document . It makes no mention of Mr. Trump or election meddling, but Mr. Mueller may be using the charges to pressure Mr. Manafort, above after pleading not guilty, into providing information about those topics. Mr. Trump tweeted that the special inquiry should focus instead on “Crooked Hillary & the Dems” — even as one of his early foreign policy advisers pleaded guilty to lying to the F.B.I. about a conversation about an offer of Russian “dirt” on Hillary Clinton. _____ Image Credit Chung Sung-Jun/Getty Images • New alarm over North Korea’s nuclear program: A South Korean scientist told lawmakers that another explosion at the North’s test site could destabilize the area and send radioactive material into the atmosphere. Above, tracking seismic waves from North Korea’s sixth nuclear test in September. The U.S. sent a nuclear-capable B-2 stealth bomber over undisclosed parts of the Pacific region ahead of President Trump’s visit to Asia, which starts in Japan over the weekend. _____ Image Credit Manu Fernandez/Associated Press • Spain’s attorney general said that Catalan leaders would be prosecuted for declaring Catalonia’s independence from Spain. Judges will now decide whether to charge them with rebellion, sedition and misuse of public funds for organizing the Oct. 1 independence referendum. The dismissed Catalan leader, Carles Puigdemont, arrived in Belgium, where he may seek asylum. _____ Image Credit Michael Klimentyev/Kremlin, via European Pressphoto Agency • Russia’s strategy of using oil as a geopolitical tool to spread its influence faces a crucial test this week in Venezuela , where Moscow is effectively taking China’s place as principal banker. The government of President Nicolás Maduro, above with President Vladimir Putin in Moscow this month, must come up with $1 billion to avert default — and Russia has been making loans and deals that could save it from collapse. What does Moscow get? Influence in Washington’s backyard. _____ Image Credit Chris Pizzello/Invision, via Associated Press • Harvey Weinstein faces new sexual assault accusations that extend the span of the allegations to the 1970s. And Kevin Spacey, above, apologized after he was accused of sexually accosting a 14-year-old actor 31 years ago, but came under fire for using the same statement to come out as gay. Sexual harassment claims also surfaced in Britain's  Parliament . One minister was hanging onto his job after admitting he asked a staff member to buy sex toys. Dozens of lawmakers are accused of sexism and inappropriate behavior or worse. _____ Image Credit Guillaume Souvant/Agence France-Presse — Getty Images • The U.S. and China have something in common: a taste for French butter . But satisfying it is coming at the cost of prices hikes and sporadic shortages in France, prompting both mock panic and real anxiety. “Not having butter in France,” one woman said, “that’s appalling.” _____ Business Image Credit Greg Baker/Agence France-Presse — Getty Images • China will continue to “open up” to economic reform. That was President Xi Jinping’s message as he held court before influential executives from China, Asia and the U.S., including Tim Cook of Apple and Mark Zuckerberg of Facebook. Above, Mr. Xi shown at the Communist Party congress last week. • The iPhone X goes on sale in 55 countries and territories on Friday, after a week of booming pre-orders. Here’s our review . • President Trump is expected to name Jerome Powell to lead the Federal Reserve as early as Thursday. He is a Republican with deep roots in the party’s establishment and in the financial industry. • Executive expertise: Our departing Corner Office columnist interviewed 525 chief executives through the years. Here’s what he learned . • U.S. stocks were weaker . Here’s a snapshot of global markets . In the News Image Credit Safin Hamed/Agence France-Presse — Getty Images • The resignation of Massoud Barzani, the president of Iraqi Kurdistan since 2005, represents more fallout from a Kurdish independence vote that many now see as a catastrophic blunder. He has no clear successor. [ The New York Times ] • In Afghanistan, the Taliban are increasingly refining their own opium in Afghanistan to make more money in a troubling turn for the war. [ The New York Times ] • Prime Minister Malcolm Turnbull of Australia is in Israel for today’s commemoration of the 100th anniversary of Allied troops’ victory in the Battle of Beersheba. Some of those attending are descendants of rarely recognized indigenous soldiers. [ ABC ] • Formal approval for the two-year trial of a medically supervised drug injecting center in inner Melbourne is expected today. [ ABC ] • In Vietnam, an appeals court ordered a new investigation into a high-profile cancer drug scam that exposed corruption, and eroded public trust, in the country’s health system. [ VNExpress ] • The Japanese government ordered hotels, stadiums and public buildings to dumb down their language when helping foreigners during a disaster. [ The Asahi Shimbun ] Smarter Living Tips, both new and old, for a more fulfilling life. Image Credit Stephen Crowley/The New York Times • Should your spouse be your best friend? • Clocks’ seasonal shifts offer the opportunity to assess your sleep habits . • Recipe of the day:  monster Halloween cookies . Noteworthy Image Credit CJ Gunther/European Pressphoto Agency • Takashi Murakami, the master of Pop Japanese anime playfulness, has teamed with Louis Vuitton and Kanye West. But his collaboration with a senior Japanese art historian has created a profound shift in his work. This 360 video goes inside a recent Murakami show. • Mali’s anti-poaching brigade, formed to protect its few hundred, extremely endangered desert elephants , has not lost a single one to poachers in nine months. • And Luke Skywalker speaks, at last. Since “Star Wars” went supernova in 1977, Mark Hamill has been placed on a pop-cultural pedestal. It’s been a conflicted relationship, but Mr. Hamill, 66, isn’t bitter or jaded, and he isn’t just Luke. Here’s our extensive profile . Back Story Image Credit Mike Segar/Reuters We begin Halloween with a ghost story. Stingy Jack invited the devil for a drink. As Irish folklore goes, Jack didn’t want to pay for the drinks, and instead convinced the devil to turn himself into a coin that could be used to settle the tab. The devil agreed, but Jack ditched the tab and kept the coin. When he finally died, Stingy Jack was denied entry to both heaven and hell and instead was given a burning coal to light his way as he roamed the earth for eternity. He placed the coal in a carved-out turnip, turning it into a lantern. Stingy Jack became known as “Jack of the Lantern,” or Jack-o’-Lantern, by the late 17th century. Elsewhere in Europe, making lanterns out of potatoes and beets was part of a fall harvest celebration. Lights were also thought to ward off evil spirits. By the end of the 19th century, European immigrants in America switched their carving tradition over to pumpkins . “The fortunate pumpkin is a noble fruit, a joy in the mouth of mankind, a paean of Autumn on the happy palate,” a 1942 Times article proclaimed. “The unfortunate pumpkin becomes a jack-o’-lantern.” Remy Tumin contributed reporting. _____ Your Morning Briefing is published weekday mornings and updated online. Browse past briefings here . We have briefings timed for the Australian , Asian , European and American mornings. And our Australia bureau chief offers a weekly letter adding analysis and conversations with readers. You can sign up for these and other Times newsletters here . What would you like to see here? Contact us at asiabriefing@nytimes.com . Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              