   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index New York Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Bookshelf An Unexpected President, and Expressions of Subway Therapy Image Chester A. Arthur, right, sworn in as president. Credit Library of Congress By  Sam Roberts Oct. 18, 2017 Federal Hall in Lower Manhattan is the site of George Washington’s inauguration in 1789, but only one building in New York City still exists where a president was sworn in: a virtually unmarked, five-story brownstone in Kips Bay, Manhattan. Located at 123 Lexington Avenue, the building was once the private residence of Vice President Chester A. Arthur, who ascended to the presidency there on Sept. 20, 1881. Hours earlier, Arthur had received a dreaded telegram from his cabinet confirming that President James A. Garfield, who had been lingering with a gunshot wound inflicted on July 2 by a would-be assassin, had finally died. Like his home, Arthur, a product of the New York Republican machine, remains so obscure that the latest biography of the one-term president demands two subtitles. “The Unexpected President: The Life and Times of Chester A. Arthur” (Da Capo), by Scott S. Greenberger, may not inspire a pilgrimage to Kalustyan’s spice store, which now occupies the ground floor of the building, but it piquantly redeems its second subtitle: “A Gilded Age Tale of Corruption and Courage.” The corruption refers to the spoils system, the pattern of political patronage and kickbacks from employees to the New York Republican machine that Roscoe Conkling and his cronies dominated after the Civil War. Garfield was a victim of that system because he was assassinated by a disgruntled job-seeker. Arthur was an instrument and major beneficiary of the system as the federal customs collector of the Port of New York until he was sacked in 1878 by his reform-minded fellow Republican, Rutherford B. Hayes. “He never held an office,” one critic scoffed when Arthur was nominated for vice president, “except the one he was removed from.” He showed early hints of goodness, if not greatness. The son of an abolitionist preacher, Arthur successfully sued on behalf of Elizabeth Jennings, a black Manhattan woman who had been ejected from a whites-only trolley. And as president, he somehow rose to the occasion, an ascendance that Mr. Greenberger and others attribute to two dozen inspiring letters from a stranger, Julia Sand, a bedridden Manhattan woman who became his conscience. When Conkling demanded the Custom House collector’s job for a crony, Arthur not only refused, but sponsored Civil Service reforms. “For the vice presidency I was indebted to Mr. Conkling,” Arthur said, “But for the presidency of the United States, my debt is to the Almighty.” The definitive biography of Arthur’s presidency may still be Thomas C. Reeves’s stolid “Gentleman Boss” (1975). In Mr. Greenberger’s book, Arthur isn’t sworn in until page 173 of the 242-page text. But the author’s vibrant narrative and fetching personal profiles transform a biography about a largely overlooked political figure into a suspensefully, well, unexpectedly gratifying read. Image People look at sticky notes in the art piece “Subway Therapy” at the Union Square subway station in New York in 2016. Credit Kena Betancur/Agence France-Presse — Getty Images In the song, “The Sound of Silence,” Simon and Garfunkel proclaimed that “the words of the prophets are written on the subway walls.” Inspired by his aunt, Laura M. Holson, a reporter for The New York Times, and beginning with a hand-lettered sign that urged “Express Yourself” that he taped on the white tiles in the Union Square station last year during and after the presidential election, Matthew (Levee) Chavez started a communal art project that brought those lyrics to life. In “Signs of Hope: Messages from Subway Therapy” (Bloomsbury), Mr. Chavez recalls why and how supposedly complacent New Yorkers and visitors were encouraged to post thousands of kaleidoscopic sticky notes that celebrate free speech and — in contrast to the song’s lament about “people hearing without listening” — demonstrate the healing potential of ordinary people expressing themselves. Among the messages: “Doubt is a sign of your intelligence”; “A candle loses nothing by lighting another”; “I feel invisible. I feel alone. Now at least we can feel that way together”; and “Maybe it’s time to get to know the other half of the country.” About 5,000 of the notes have been preserved by The New-York Historical Society. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page MB 3 of the New York edition with the headline: A New Yorker Thrust Into History . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              