   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Politics Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Merrick Garland Battle Moves to Home Front as Senate Recesses Image Senate Democrats held a news conference outside the Supreme Court. They urged Senate Republicans to proceed with the confirmation process for Judge Merrick B. Garland. Credit Stephen Crowley/The New York Times By  David M. Herszenhorn March 18, 2016 WASHINGTON — The fight over the vacancy on the Supreme Court shifted from close combat in the halls of Congress to a nationwide battle on Friday as senators returned to their home states for a two-week recess and Republican and Democratic leaders began aggressively making their cases in television and radio interviews, op-ed columns and public appearances. With little hope of a confirmation hearing before the November elections, the debate over the vacancy left by the death of Justice Antonin Scalia is entering a critical phase — away from the corridors of power in Washington. One clear sign that the issue was resonating in campaigns came Friday when Senator Mark S. Kirk of Illinois, who faces a difficult re-election campaign, categorically broke with the Republican leadership. Mr. Kirk said in a radio interview that his party should “man up and vote” on Mr. Obama’s choice, Judge Merrick B. Garland of the federal appeals court for the District of Columbia. President Obama led the push for the Democrats in an interview on National Public Radio in which he urged Republicans to give fair consideration to his nominee. Mr. Obama described him as one of the best judges of his generation. Judge Garland, the president said, “would help to burnish the sense that the Supreme Court is above politics and not just an extension of politics, and would set a good tone for restoring — or at least increasing — the American people’s confidence in our justice system.” Why Obama Nominated Merrick Garland for the Supreme Court Merrick B. Garland is a candidate who had support from Republicans in the past but would still move the court in a progressive direction. March 16, 2016 With no parliamentary tool available to Senate Democrats to force the Republican majority to take up the Garland nomination, the focus now turns to how big an issue the Supreme Court vacancy will be in the presidential election and in a number of key Senate races that could determine whether Republicans retain their majority. Republican leaders, in refusing to hold hearings or a vote, have insisted that their position has nothing to do with any individual nominee but is intended to allow voters to decide the ideological tilt of the Supreme Court when they choose a new president. Reiterating that position in an op-ed article in USA Today on Friday, the Senate majority leader, Mitch McConnell, Republican of Kentucky, wrote, “The next Supreme Court justice could fundamentally alter the direction of the court and our country for a generation, and the American people deserve a voice in such a momentous decision.” “The American people may well elect a president who decides to renominate Judge Garland,” Mr. McConnell said. “The next president may also nominate someone very different.” The Senate will then look at the candidate he wrote, declaring: “That’s a fair approach. That’s a reasonable compromise. That’s the best way forward for our country now.” Aides said Mr. McConnell would appear on four of the five major Sunday news shows to argue his position. In response, Democrats have opened a nationwide campaign, portraying the Republicans as obstructionist and unreasonable. And there were initial indications that Democrats were gaining momentum; their rallying cry — “Do Your Job” — was trending nationally on Twitter. Video The New York Times reporter Adam Liptak discusses the nomination of Merrick B. Garland and why Republicans might block him. Published On March 16, 2016 “Democrats are going to be relentless, repetitive, and resolute in calling on our Republican colleagues to do their job across the country — but we won’t be alone,” said Senator Chuck Schumer of New York, who is positioned to take over as the Senate Democratic leader next year. “Americans of all political stripes agree that giving Judge Garland fair consideration for the Supreme Court is both our job as senators and the right thing to do.” Mr. Obama, in his NPR interview, said he hoped Republicans would act out of a sense of duty to the institutions of American government and also out of basic fairness. “My simple pitch to them is: be fair,” Mr. Obama said. “I’m not demanding that Republicans vote for Merrick Garland,” he said, “but do not stop the process in its tracks. Because if you do, then the ever-escalating, ever-worsening problems behind not just judicial nominees, but nominations generally, are going to continue to make our government more and more dysfunctional. And at some point, it’s got to stop.” “A good place for it to stop,” the president said, “is when we’re talking about a Supreme Court seat and we have an impeccably qualified candidate who the Republicans themselves have acknowledged is deserving of being on the court.” The breadth of the Democrats’ effort was clear in a television appearance on Friday morning by Senator Jon Tester of Montana at KBZK, the CBS-affiliate in Bozeman. Mr. Tester stopped well short of endorsing Judge Garland, who was confirmed for his current seat in 1997 long before the senator took office. But Mr. Tester made a forceful pitch for taking up the nomination. “I really think the folks out there who think that we just ought to ignore this for the next 15 months not only are not doing their job, they are not following the Constitution,” Mr. Tester said. “I can’t imagine the forefathers when they drafted up the Constitution: ‘Say, when a justice passes away well let’s just wait 15 months before you put the next one in.’ ” Image Judge Garland with President Obama at the White House the day his nomination was announced. Credit Doug Mills/The New York Times The same basic argument was made by Senator Sherrod Brown, Democrat of Ohio, in an op-ed article to be published Sunday in The Cincinnati Enquirer. He turned to a metaphor that might catch the attention of morning readers. “Imagine being a cook in a diner,” Mr. Brown wrote. “You have specific duties outlined in your job description. You work the breakfast shift, so you scramble and cook the eggs for omelets; you fry the bacon; you mix the waffle batter and pour it in the waffle iron. What would happen if one day you decided not to do part of your job? Say you refused to cook the eggs and customers wound up with a runny mess instead of the delicious omelets promised to them on the menu. What do you think would happen when you tried to collect your paycheck? No doubt, you’d be fired on the spot.” Then, the punch line: “Now imagine that instead of a cook you’re a United States senator, and you have an idea of the scenario playing out in Washington today over the Supreme Court. Except, unlike you, senators are happily collecting their paychecks while still refusing to do their jobs and consider President Obama’s nominee.” In the same newspaper, Ohio’s other senator, Rob Portman, a Republican, wrote a column defending the Republican stance, saying it would be better to delay acting on a nomination than to “go through a high contentious process with a very high likelihood the nominee would not be confirmed.” Other Republicans were maneuvered aggressively to push their side. “President Barack Obama has exercised his authority to nominate someone to fill the vacancy, but the Senate has an equal authority to determine whether to proceed with that nomination,” Senator John Cornyn of Texas, the No. 2 Republican, wrote in an op-ed published on CNN’s website . “I believe the American people deserve to have a voice in the selection of the next Supreme Court justice,” he wrote, “and the best way to ensure that happens is to have the Senate consider a nomination made by the next president.” Gardiner Harris contributed reporting.  Follow The New York Times’s politics and Washington coverage on Facebook and Twitter , and sign up for the First Draft politics newsletter . A version of this article appears in print on , on Page A 14 of the New York edition with the headline: With Senate on Recess, Garland Battle Moves From Capitol to Home Front . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Related Coverage Merrick Garland Visits Capitol as G.O.P. Digs In Against Vote March 17, 2016 Image Where Merrick Garland Stands: A Close Look at His Judicial Record March 17, 2016 Image How Long Will This Last? Our Reporter Answers Questions on the Supreme Court Nomination March 17, 2016 Image Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              