   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Dance Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by American Realness: Subversive, Crowded and Lit by Vital Sparks Image The Canadian choreographer Dana Michel performing her own “Mercurial George” as part of the American Realness festival at the Abrons Arts Center. Credit Andrea Mohin/The New York Times By  Siobhan Burke Jan. 10, 2017 The downstairs lobby of the Abrons Arts Center on the Lower East Side is a gray, unglamorous space. But on Sunday night, the voguer Jason Anthony Rodriguez , known as Slim Ninja, strutted in as if it were a catwalk, parting the crowd that had gathered there with a sweep of his arms, then striking pose after steely-eyed pose. It was an electric performance — for those who could see it, at least. The place was packed, wall to wall, with many of the audience members, who had come to see Ni’Ja Whitson’s “A Meditation on Tongues” as part of the American Realness festival, stranded on the stairs leading down to the lobby. Shouts of “We can’t see anything!” and “Work! Even though we can’t see you!” could be heard over the pulsing music. The scene captured some of the best and worst aspects of American Realness , the festival of contemporary performance that takes over the Abrons each January: on the one hand, irresistible dancing grounded in smart, subversive choices; on the other, a sense of complicated work too hastily assembled. While some artists may deliberately play with invisibility and obfuscation, the site-specific opening of “Meditation” — first the vogueing solo; then some related vignettes in a long, dark hallway — seemed intended to be fully seen. Yet both nights that I attended, seeing proved difficult. Maybe such logistical problems are inevitable at a festival that boldly sets out to produce as much new work in as little time as American Realness. “Meditation,” a reflection on black masculinities inspired by the 1989 film “Tongues Untied,” was one of five world premieres in the eighth edition of Realness. The lineup, organized by the festival’s founder and curator, Thomas Benjamin Snapp Pryor, also includes four United States premieres, seven reprises, three works in progress, two exhibitions and five workshops and discussions, unveiled over just eight days. Why the deluge? Along with festivals like Coil (presented by PS122) and Under the Radar (at the Public Theater), Realness coincides with the annual convention of the Association of Performing Arts Presenters , which draws hundreds of curators and producers to New York in early January, for what’s essentially a live-art shopping spree. During this time, critics, too, might find themselves bingeing on performance — a feast that can be nourishing or depleting. The premieres at this year’s Realness took me to both extremes. Here are a few standout moments. Image Meg Stuart in “An Evening of Solo Works” at Abrons Arts Center. Credit Andrea Mohin/The New York Times Vital Rage For the second year in a row, Ligia Lewis, a Dominican-born choreographer living in Berlin, offered the most vital new work in the festival. “Minor Matter,” the second part of her “Blue, Red, White” triptych, is a beautiful, blistering trio for her, Jonathan Gonzalez and Hector Thami Manekehla. One of her guiding questions, stated in a description of the work: “Can the black box be host to a black experience that goes beyond identity politics?” Whether erupting into synchronized stepping routines, flinging their bodies into precarious entanglements, or trying to scale the walls of the black box theater, the three rode a fine line between fighting for, and against, one another. While some of this year’s Realness fare felt relentlessly inward-gazing — like Karol Tyminski’s grating exercise in self-flagellation, “This Is a Musical” — “Minor Matter” tapped into a place of generous and generative rage. Dancing Alone The solo is a popular form at January festivals, the choreographer’s version of packing light. But some solos deal more explicitly with solitude than others. Both Meg Stuart, in “An Evening of Solo Works” (four pieces from the last two decades), and the Canadian choreographer Dana Michel, the star of her own “Mercurial George,” offered poetic portraits of the self unmoored from others. In her pared-down worlds, Ms. Stuart contended again and again with her own flesh, manipulating parts of her body as if to assure herself they were there, or trying to shake them free. Ms. Michel found companionship, rather heartbreakingly, in objects that populated her stage: plastic bags, tin cups, a podium zipped up inside a tent, where she delivered an impassioned, barely decipherable speech. Teetering through the clutter, she maintained an arrestingly unsteady state for the nearly hourlong work, flirting with control — how much to keep, how much to relinquish — over her body, her voice, her surroundings. “Cage Shuffle,” a new solo by Paul Lazar with choreography by Annie-B Parson (the two are the co-directors of Big Dance Theater ; they’re also married), was less bleak. In a kind of choreographic juggling act, Mr. Lazar recited minute-long stories from John Cage’s “ Indeterminacy ” — fed to him through an ear piece in random order — while performing a nonrandom sequence of movement, which itself had a kind of scrambled, shuffling quality. Later he repeated the same phrase, accompanied by an electronic score mixed live by Lea Bertucci. The brain-teasing tasks were good company. Artists or Brands? Alex Rodabaugh’s “Amerishowz,” presented at Gibney Dance Center in Lower Manhattan, took satirical aim at the economic structures around life as a dancer and dance maker. In an opening PowerPoint presentation, he and three members of a so-called 2017 Circle of Champions introduced a scheme to help starving artists capitalize on their roles as “walking talking advertisements for performance.” Later sections, each stranger and more physically strenuous than the first, explored the transformation of an artist into a brand. Back at Abrons, Ni’Ja Whitson’s “Meditation” took on more sweeping social problems: racism and homophobia, in particular discrimination against black gay men. This choreographer, joined by Kirsten Flores-Davis, has a magnetic presence that we could more fully enjoy once seated in the Underground Theater, after the chaotic prelude. The relationship between the dancers remained fluid, shifting from platonic to romantic, combative to supportive. As one said during a climactic sprint around the theater, “Our angers ricochet between us.” Correction :  An earlier version of this review misstated the number of world premieres at the festival. There are five, not four. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page C 8 of the New York edition with the headline: Subversive, Crowded and Unexpected . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              