   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Music Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Admit One Stravinsky or Ska? You Call the Shots Image A Shuffle concert at the Scholes Street Studio in Brooklyn. Credit Scholes Street Studio By  Anand Giridharadas March 6, 2014 THE people around me were ordering music the way I order a burger. “I’ll take the Prokofiev,” No. 12 declared. “Let’s have the Bach,” No. 2 said. At the Shuffle Concert , where crowdsourcing crashes into classical, every guest gets a number. If yours is called, you pick the next piece. The pieces are numbered, too: In theory, Guest No. 4 could order Piece No. 6. But to prevent the whole thing from tumbling into anarchy, the audience knows to skip the menu numbers and order by composer name. For full effect, you should mutter it casually, as if you and Stravinsky go way back. If there’s a faintly European gargling noise involved (see, for example, Bach), gargle it. Classical music can rouse the aspiring sophisticate in some people. But on a recent rainy evening in a Brooklyn district that real estate brokers might call “on the cusp of the cusp,” in the dingy borderlands between East Williamsburg and Bushwick, an experiment was in progress. An ensemble of six young but highly accomplished classical musicians was magnificently slumming it for one night, knocking the genre from its pedestal with a game of musical “Choose Your Own Adventure.” Their goal is to create a gateway drug to classical music for casual and sporadic listeners like me who want something in between the tap water of department store Mozart and the heroin of a Bach “Brandenburg” Concerto marathon. The result is old music rebottled for new times: brief pieces in dizzying sequence for an age of narrow attention spans, and audience choice for a moment when it’s becoming a right to curate your cultural diet. Of course, because we live in a democracy, we know that it doesn’t guarantee that we know how to choose, that our welfare will be any better than if a benign dictator had chosen and that votes won’t be bought, stolen or (in my case) “influenced” by a tall, bearded stranger. “Have you ever shuffled before?” a genial man named Oded Naaman asked arriving guests. If not, he explained the Shuffle Concert way. On your menu is a unique handwritten number and a list of 35 musical works in 15 categories, from B. G. Marcello, under Baroque, to Björk under Pop/Rock. (Part of the gateway drugging is to stir contemporary music in with the classical.) If the musicians call your number, you choose what everyone hears next. The ensemble is prepared to play all 35. Like any newly enfranchised people, we quickly had to learn how to choose, after having had decisions made for us for so long. The person sitting beside me, Barbara Kalish, said she knew she had to pick a piece featuring the recorder, because her recorder teacher plays in the ensemble. This limited her to the Baroque period, which — along with middle school — is an important period for the recorder. Seeing me struggle to choose, she asked, “How do you choose what you eat in a restaurant?” That made me wonder: What was the classical music analogue of always getting the thing closest to beef? Ms. Kalish also offered this: “Think of yourself as someone other — the conversation between the head and the heart.” Though I didn’t know what this meant, I sensed it was good advice. Then the tall, authoritatively bearded stranger entered our row with a companion and took Ms. Kalish’s place, driving her a few seats down. He detected my uncertainty and told me to go with No. 9 on the menu, the first movement of Beethoven’s Sonata No. 8 in G (Op. 30, No. 3), and No. 26, a Stravinsky suite that he called “a very large work,” which meant little to me but, with musical pieces as with beef pieces, seemed better than a small one. I realize now that I was his proxy vote. It was a shrewd move for him, because I was chosen and he wasn’t, and his Beethoven selection was played anyway. Image Each member of the audience has a number. The stranger introduced himself as Lis Cena, a musician for the love and an architect for the money. He knew his classical, and he knew about the debates over whether music, and art generally, should engage the audience this way, through what some might consider pandering. Mr. Cena called the Shuffle Concert’s engagement “a regression — and not an unwelcome regression.” What he meant was that the audience members used to play a bigger part in serious music — whether being allowed to throw things and yell for arias to be repeated at the opera, or simply having their comprehension matter to the composer. “Composers like Stravinsky tried to suppress the audience,” he alleged. (Stravinsky, being dead, was unreachable for comment.) Mr. Cena cited Stravinsky’s 1927 opera “Oedipus Rex,” whose Latin libretto, in Mr. Cena’s account, made the work inscrutable to the masses. “Making works of art that do not depend on the consumption of the audience — that was the Modernist project,” he said. “So this is nice,” he added. The ensemble emerged: Ariadne Greif, a soprano; Francisco Fullana, on violin; Moran Katz, clarinet; Sofia Nowik, cello; Hassan Anderson, oboe; and Eliran Avni, a pianist and the creative director of the group, which is drawn from Israel, Spain and the United States. They range in age from 23 to 38, but their achievements outside the ensemble, which performs occasionally, are formidable: studying at Juilliard, playing Carnegie Hall, receiving a Guarneri violin made in 1679 from the Stradivari Society, making a debut with the Israel Philharmonic Orchestra at the age of 17. They began with a work of their own choosing, a sashaying tango by Piazzolla, before unleashing Jacksonian democracy. When the first voter chose “Desafinado,” a bossa nova song, they erupted with glee. It was lushly plain that these artists — ascending the narrow (and ever narrowing) spiral staircase of the classical world, disciplining themselves in their art rigorously since before taking up razors and deodorant — relished the temporary liberty of this music and of this bond with a living, choosing audience. As they played, they swayed. Their eyebrows jiggled and did the worm, as if they were freelancing for tips. They closed their eyes at times, and stood on the tips of their toes for emphasis. They moved as if the music were something they were riding atop, not creating — as if they were a wild elephant’s rapturous mahouts. The audience’s choices zagged across genres and eras — from the 20th-century Brazilian songwriter Antônio Carlos Jobim to the Baroque composer G. P. Telemann; from klezmer to opera to Broadway; from joyous to sober. I thought of my old Russian piano teacher, conservatory-trained and headmistress strict, who argued that merely listening to (let alone playing) bastardizations like jazz would sully my admittedly limited skills. Here was the rebuttal I wish I had then: musicians who knew their Mozart but could just as easily belt out the “Chicago” show tune “When You’re Good to Mama,” oozing sexuality into an event whose menu suggested nothing riskier than some late Lutoslawski. When I first heard of Shuffle Concert, I was skeptically intrigued. Sure, we the people, in order to form a more perfect concert, got to choose the selection and order of the music, but the larger repertoire was beyond our control. To be in the room that evening, though, was to discover the tension and the drama of never knowing what’s next. In a concert, as in so many other art forms, transitions are no less important than what they demarcate. The stitching makes the suit, at least as much as the sections of cloth. And here the audience did the stitching. We decided to put “Mama” after Beethoven, to bench the soprano for most of the first half and summon her back for most of the second. We made the mood. For the artist, this audience power can be both stressful and exhilarating: the wondering about whether they’ll choose you, or about why they keep going with the violinist, not you. Mr. Anderson, the oboist, was worried about all this, and also worried, after a longish spell on the sidelines, that his reed had dried. “If they call me at the last moment, I gotta suck, suck, suck and make sure it’s O.K.,” he later remembered thinking. Mr. Anderson grew up in the South, where he was often the only black child in the orchestra. He will tell you that his mother sold her Honda Accord to buy him an oboe. Now he juggles teaching music to middle school students in Newark, taking public transit around the region to $50 gigs that take hours of rehearsing, and playing in this ensemble, whose members seem to “get” him better than his own blood kin. “We’re all hustlers,” he said. When the members of the crowd, on their final occasion, chose a piece featuring Mr. Anderson, it seemed to remind him of the worth of his own choice. He leapt to his feet, his smile as wide as an oboe is long. “You like me, you really like me!” he said — and almost sang — to his audience. “I get to play!” Follow Anand Giridharadas on Twitter at @AnandWrites .  The next Shuffle Concert is on Monday at 8 p.m. at the Greene Space, 44 Charlton Street, at Varick Street, SoHo; shuffleconcert.com. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page C 25 of the New York edition with the headline: Beethoven or Björk? You’re the Maestro . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              