   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index U.S. Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by California Today California Today: Rep. Adam B. Schiff on Impeachment Talk and More Image Representative Adam B. Schiff, Democrat of Burbank, delivered a speech at the California Democratic Party convention in Sacramento on Saturday. Credit Rich Pedroncelli/Associated Press By  Mike McPhate May 23, 2017 Good morning. (Want to get California Today by email? Here’s the sign-up .) Representative Adam B. Schiff is having a moment. A 16-year veteran of the House from Burbank, Mr. Schiff got the star treatment at California’s Democratic convention last weekend. According to Politico , he was mobbed by fans wanting selfies or simply to say “thank you.” The adulation stems from Mr. Schiff’s role as the ranking Democrat on the House committee investigating possible collusion between President Trump’s campaign and Russian operatives. On Saturday, in a speech to the Democrats in Sacramento, Mr. Schiff returned the praise, calling them “the very soul of the resistance.” We caught up with Mr. Schiff by phone a couple of days later. Some excerpts: Q. Some activists are making calls to impeach Mr. Trump. What’s your view? A. I prosecuted an impeachment in the Senate a few years ago involving a federal judge who was corrupt . It was a very serious undertaking when it involved a judge with a lifetime appointment. It’s a whole other order of magnitude when you’re talking about the president of the United States. I don’t think it’s something that anyone should rush toward without understanding the full evidence of what the president may or may not have done. Republicans accuse the state’s Democrats of letting an obsession with Mr. Trump sidetrack them from important issues. Is there some truth to that? Part of it is just structural. We are in the minority. And the administration is threatening to do away with health care for tens of millions of people and so we have to defend against that. And the president is walking away from our global leadership in combating climate change and we have to defend against that. But we have to continue to emphasize what we are for. And in particular how we’ll create economic opportunity for all across the country. There’s been a big push for sanctuary policies in California. Do you support them? I do. And this is an area where I think the mantle of leadership is really being taken up by states like California that can lead the way in protecting families, opposing efforts to deport fathers and mothers and brothers and sisters. Do you worry about Mr. Trump punishing California? I worry about it in the sense that he does have a vindictive aspect of his character — “You’re either for me or against me.” We have a lot of power and influence in the California delegation to Congress. We have some of the top leadership on both sides of the aisle. So we’re in a position to fight back against that. If Senator Dianne Feinstein doesn’t run again, would you go for her seat? I’m hoping that Senator Feinstein will run again. I think she has a tremendous leadership role right now and invaluable experience. If she decides not to for whatever reason, it’s certainly something I would want to consider. California Online (Please note: We regularly highlight articles on sites that have limited access for nonsubscribers.) Image Supporters of universal health care marched in Sacramento last month. Credit Rich Pedroncelli/Associated Press • Analysts calculated a price tag for universal health care in California. It’s bigger than the state’s budget. [ Sacramento Bee ] • Cut off funds to sanctuary cities ? The Trump administration hasn’t made good on its threat. [ The New York Times ] • Federal officials agreed to finance upgrades to an aging railroad linking San Francisco and San Jose. [ San Francisco Chronicle ] Image Stephen Curry, left, celebrated with teammates Andre Iguodala and Matt Barnes after the Warriors completed a sweep of the Spurs in San Antonio, Tex., on Monday. Credit Tyler Smith/European Pressphoto Agency • The Warriors swept the San Antonio Spurs . They’ll now compete in their third straight N.B.A. finals. [ The New York Times ] • The Anaheim Ducks had less luck. They were eliminated from the Stanley Cup playoffs. [ Orange County Register ] • Uber drivers in Kenya barely scrape by. Now the company is pushing its prices even lower. [ The New York Times ] • Counting on a cannabis boom , desert cities are trying to reinvent themselves as destinations for growers. [ Los Angeles Times ] Image The Monterey County Sheriff’s Office said a mudslide in Big Sur went from bad to worse over the weekend. Credit Monterey County Sheriff’s Office • Video: A landslide has buried Highway 1 in Big Sur . [ The Tribune ] • “We should be worried.” What’s behind all the shark sightings in Southern California? [ San Diego Union-Tribune ] • 48 Hours in Solvang : Just north of Santa Barbara is a Danish village. [ Bayarea.com ] Image Credit Jake Michaels for The New York Times • The photographer Jake Michaels captures Los Angeles street style . [ The New York Times ] • A robot twin of the food critic Jonathan Gold will tell you where to eat in Los Angeles. Just ask. [ Los Angeles Times ] And Finally ... Image Kindergarten students practiced writing at a charter school in Los Angeles. Credit Monica Almeida/The New York Times Last week, an election for the Los Angeles Unified school board tilted its balance of power toward charter school supporters. That set the stage for a possible increase in the number of publicly funded but privately run schools in the district. We asked where you stood. Among the responses, critics of charter schools outnumbered supporters by roughly two to one. Samples from the feedback: “Pupils in our schools should all be educated as Americans, not be divided by religion or whatever criterion separate school systems might use. Charter schools erode this principle and this erosion should not be paid for by public money.” — Annie Zaenen, Emerald Hills “Charter schools give parents and kids choices. The teachers are more engaged and motivated because class sizes can be limited, and they have more say in what goes on in their classroom.” — Heather Leigh, Arcata “The proliferation of charter schools has not created better educational opportunities for most as charters pick and choose the students they want, and immediately expel those who are not succeeding.” — Amy Golden, Oakland “I don’t think charter schools are the be-all and end-all, but we have to find functional administration somewhere.” — Tom Tyrrell, Los Angeles California Today goes live at 6 a.m. Pacific time weekdays. Tell us what you want to see: CAtoday@nytimes.com . The California Today columnist, Mike McPhate, is a third-generation Californian — born outside Sacramento and raised in San Juan Capistrano. He lives in Davis. California Today is edited by Julie Bloom, who grew up in Los Angeles and graduated from U.C. Berkeley. Correction :  A caption on a photograph accompanying an earlier version this article misidentified a player on the Warriors. He is Andre Iguodala, not Draymond Green. Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              