   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Politics Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by F.B.I. Chief Says Politics Won’t Interfere With Inquiry on Hillary Clinton’s Email Image James B. Comey, the director of the F.B.I., testified before the House Select Intelligence Committee in September. Credit Chip Somodevilla/Getty Images By  Michael S. Schmidt Oct. 1, 2015 WASHINGTON — The F.B.I. director, James B. Comey, said Thursday that he was certain the bureau would be able to complete the investigation into Hillary Rodham Clinton’s personal email account in a timely manner and that he would make sure politics did not interfere with it. “I am following this very closely, and I get briefed on it regularly,” Mr. Comey said at a quarterly meeting with reporters at F.B.I. headquarters. He added, “I am confident we have the resources and the personnel assigned to the matter, as we do all our work, so that we are able to do it in a professional, prompt and independent way.” The F.B.I. opened an investigation this summer into how classified materials were handled in connection with Mrs. Clinton’s account when she was secretary of state in response to a referral from the inspector general of the intelligence community. The inspector general, I. Charles McCullough III , had said that sensitive national security information had been found in the account. It is illegal to have classified information on an unsecure network. Mrs. Clinton, who is seeking the Democratic nomination for president, has said that she complied with all federal laws and regulations regarding email use. Mr. Comey declined to discuss the specifics of the inquiry, but said that one of the reasons he has a 10-year term as director was “to make sure this organization stays outside of politics.” “If you know my folks, you know they don’t give a rip about politics,” Mr. Comey said. “And my job as director of the F.B.I. is to ensure that we remain those things I said we are: competent, honest and independent — and that we do our work well. Part of doing our work well is we don’t talk about it while we do it.” Mr. Comey declined to answer a question about whether he would make the results of the investigation public when it is completed, even if charges are not filed. He said that lawmakers on Capitol Hill had asked him recently about the investigation, but he said that he had declined to discuss it with them.  Follow the New York Times’s politics and Washington coverage on Facebook and Twitter , and sign up for the First Draft politics newsletter . Related Coverage 3 Hillary Clinton Emails Deemed ‘Secret’ in State Dept. Review of 6,300 Pages Sept. 30, 2015 Image String of Emails Raises Questions About When Hillary Clinton Began Using Personal Account Sept. 25, 2015 Image Hillary Clinton Email Inquiry Weighs if Aides Erred at ‘Send’ Sept. 24, 2015 Image Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              