   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index U.S. Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Gerrymandering Case Echoes in Inkblot-Like Districts Across the U.S. Image Voters cast their ballots in Wisconsin last year. Credit Amber Arnold/Wisconsin State Journal, via Associated Press By  Michael Cooper June 19, 2017 The Supreme Court’s decision to hear a case on partisan gerrymandering in Wisconsin is being closely watched in other states, including Pennsylvania, where a lawsuit is challenging the process that gave the state its so-called Goofy Kicking Donald Duck-shaped congressional district. In the Wisconsin case, the Supreme Court said on Monday that it would consider whether partisan gerrymandering violates the Constitution. The court has never struck down an election map on the grounds that it helped one political party at the expense of another. The announcement came as several states are still waging legal battles over redistricting, the once-a-decade process of drawing new election districts to reflect population changes — an event typically seized on by whichever party is in power to draw maps that favor its incumbents. Here are some other states with election maps before the courts. Pennsylvania’s Seventh Congressional District A Rorschach-test inkblot of a district that has been likened to “Goofy Kicking Donald Duck,” this district meanders through five counties and is so narrow in parts that it is only the width of a restaurant in King of Prussia and of an endoscopy center in Coatesville, according to a lawsuit filed by voting rights activists last week. The suit, filed in state court , contends that Republican lawmakers crossed a line when they redrew congressional boundaries in 2011, creating a map that helped Republicans win control of 13 of the state’s 18 districts even though registered Democrats outnumber Republicans in the state. Pennsylvania Republicans have called the suit baseless. Benjamin Geffen, a lawyer at the Public Interest Law Center working on the case, said that while the suit had been filed in state court, not federal court, he was watching the Wisconsin case closely, because the Pennsylvania lawsuit makes a similar argument about what academics call “the efficiency gap,” a measure of votes considered wasted in districts designed not to be close. “We’re optimistic that the court will at last recognize that there is a point at which a partisan gerrymander goes too far,” Mr. Geffen said in a phone interview. Maryland’s Sixth Congressional District Democrats in Maryland drew plenty of crazily shaped districts to help their party in 2011 — its Third District has been likened to a “ praying mantis ” — but a federal lawsuit challenging the state’s last round of redistricting is focused on one: the Sixth District, which yoked Democratic voters from the Washington suburbs to Republican voters in the rural west of the state. Michael B. Kimberly, the lawyer bringing the suit, said he had been watching the Wisconsin case. But he said his suit was taking a somewhat different tack, arguing that the new Maryland map violated the First Amendment rights of voters. “This is far and away the most promising time for legal challenges to partisan gerrymandering that we’ve seen in a generation,” he said in a telephone interview. The Wisconsin Effect Several election lawyers said it was unclear how far-reaching a Supreme Court ruling in the Wisconsin case might be, given that other election maps are being challenged at federal and state levels using different legal arguments. (North Carolina, which has already redrawn its maps after a challenge, is now facing challenges to its new map.) But they said it was an important moment — and noted that it could change the landscape when states begin working on their next set of election maps a few years from now. “The Supreme Court is a pretty big planet, and its gravitational pull is pretty strong,” said Justin Levitt, a professor at Loyola Law School in Los Angeles who tracks redistricting cases on his All About Redistricting website. He said the compactness of a district — and how squiggly or rectangular it was — was rarely a good indication of how gerrymandered it is. He noted that some unusually drawn districts had beneficial effects, including one in Illinois that created a heavily Latino district. Indeed, one of the defenses made by Wisconsin officials is that their districts are compact . But in November a federal court found that they were an “unconstitutional political gerrymander.” “They don’t look bizarre,” William Whitford, one of the Democratic plaintiffs suing over the Wisconsin map, said Monday on a conference call with reporters. “But if you really know the Wisconsin political geography — and that’s a learning curve! — they are bizarre.” A version of this article appears in print on , on Page A 15 of the New York edition with the headline: A Case That Reverberates In Inkblot-Like Districts . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Related Coverage When Does Political Gerrymandering Cross a Constitutional Line? May 15, 2017 Image Pennsylvania Lawsuit Says House Redistricting Is Partisan Gerrymander June 15, 2017 Image Justices to Hear Major Challenge to Partisan Gerrymandering June 19, 2017 Image Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              