   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Weddings Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Mini-Vows For Starters, Snoop Dogg and Neil Gorsuch Image By  Rosalie R. Radomsky March 10, 2018 Dr. Rachel Mirabel Shively and Leigh Gareth Llewelyn were married March 10 at the Edson Keith Mansion, an events space in Sarasota, Fla. William H. Pauley III, a judge of the United States District Court for the Southern District of New York in Manhattan, officiated. Dr. Shively, 34, is a medical toxicology fellow for Northwell Health, a hospital system based in Manhasset, N.Y., and an attending physician in emergency medicine at Elmhurst Hospital Center in Elmhurst, Queens. She graduated from Northwestern, and received a medical degree from the Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai. From 2011 to 2013 she was a clinical scholar working on vaccine development at Rockefeller University, funded by a National Institutes of Health Clinical and Translational Science Award. She is the daughter of Susan M. Burkhalter and Curtis A. Shively of Bethesda, Md. Mr. Llewelyn, 33, is a lawyer at Lankler Siffert & Wohl in Manhattan. He graduated summa cum laude from the University of South Florida. He also received both a master’s degree in English and a law degree, summa cum laude, from Duke. From 2013 to 2014 he was a clerk for Neil M. Gorsuch, now an associate justice on the Supreme Court but then a judge on the United States Court of Appeals for the 10th Circuit, in Denver. The groom is the son of Helen T. Lewis of Bradenton, Fla., and the late Gareth B. Jones, who lived in Capel Iwan, Wales. In October 2012, Mr. Llewelyn was intrigued by Dr. Shively’s OkCupid profile, which mentioned that while interning for former President Barack Obama’s 2004 Senate campaign she blasted a rap song by Snoop Dogg so loudly on her headphones that Mr. Obama stopped to ask what she was listening to, and in turn she asked him his favorite Snoop Dogg album. “I told her I had a similar conversation with Mitt Romney,” Mr. Llewelyn recalled with a laugh about the message he wrote back to her: “He said his favorite album was ‘Paid tha Cost to Be da Bo$$.’” Although Mr. Llewelyn’s conservative political leanings did not mesh with her strongly-liberal ones, his fictitious one-upmanship, humor, as well as his height appealed to her. “I have a preference for tall men,” Dr. Shively said. “I’m 5-2, and he’s 6-2. ” After a message and a text, Dr. Shively, who described herself as “not the type to fuss around,” agreed to meet him a couple of days later at Linen Hall, a bar off Union Square, and was relieved he was unfazed when she showed up 20 minutes late. “I was chatting up some old ladies at the bar,” he said, adding, “She was worth the wait,” and he soon realized “she has sort of a loose grasp of time.” They shared drinks, brussels sprouts and high-adrenaline stories — hers of the emergency room, and his from six years of working as a 911 operator and rescue diver with the Police Department of the City of Holmes Beach, Fla. They kissed good night after he walked her to the Astor Place subway station — he lived in Battery Park City and she on the Upper East Side — and a couple of weeks later the aftermath of Hurricane Sandy did not stand in the way of a second date at the Dead Poet bar in the West 70s. “The first big part of the journey I walked through Wall Street,” he said. “It was a ghost town. It was like a-last-man-on-earth kind of movie. I was able to get a cab on 30th Street. This time, I was 20 minutes late.” They began dating seriously, and soon got around to having lively political debates. “We’re both passionate about politics,” Dr. Shively said. “It’s a bane and a boon. We share core values. We’re not too different that we can’t relate to one another.” A version of this article appears in print on , on Page ST 14 of the New York edition with the headline: Talking Rap With Obama, and Romney . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              