   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Politics Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Harry V. Jaffa, Conservative Scholar and Goldwater Muse, Dies at 96 Image Dr. Harry Jaffa's book “Crisis of the House Divided: An Interpretation of the Issues in the Lincoln-Douglas Debates,” was first published in 1959. Credit Ohio State University By  Robert D. McFadden Jan. 12, 2015 Harry V. Jaffa, who explored America’s founding in many books, but shifted modern politics with two speech lines that cast Senator Barry M. Goldwater as an extremist, abetting his landslide defeat in the 1964 presidential race and the birth of a zealous new conservatism, died on Saturday in Pomona, Calif. He was 96. Dr. Jaffa, who lived in Claremont, Calif., where he was a distinguished fellow at a conservative think tank, the Claremont Institute, died at Pomona Valley Hospital, his daughter, Karen Jaffa McGoldrick, said. A professor and author of political histories, Dr. Jaffa traced the nation’s origins to the philosophies of Aristotle and John Locke, and analyzed the Declaration of Independence, the Constitution and the contributions of Washington, Jefferson, Madison and other founders. He was also a Lincoln scholar, and his book on the 1858 Lincoln-Douglas debates is regarded as a classic in its field. A disciple of the political philosopher Leo Strauss, Dr. Jaffa devoted much of his academic career to interpretations of equality, liberty, ethics, morality and patriotism, and he clashed with fellow conservatives over their meaning and the framers’ intentions. He took conservative rivals to task for ignoring “natural law,” which he called a concept of justice common to all mankind and a key to America’s foundation. Though not widely known outside academic circles, Dr. Jaffa wrote for National Review and other publications and was an astute analyst of conservative politics. In 1964, the Goldwater campaign invited him to join the candidate’s brain trust. He was thus in the Cow Palace outside San Francisco when the Republican National Convention nominated the Arizona senator to run for president. Portions of the senator’s acceptance speech were written by Karl Hess, a speechwriter, and Dr. Jaffa. Two of Dr. Jaffa’s lines resonated with Mr. Goldwater and were included as an assertion of defiance to opponents who had labeled him a right-wing extremist who might lead America into nuclear war, destroy social welfare programs and turn back progress in civil rights. Addressing the delegates and a national television audience, Mr. Goldwater delivered Dr. Jaffa’s lines near the end: “I would remind you that extremism in the defense of liberty is no vice. And let me remind you also that moderation in the pursuit of justice is no virtue.” (Mr. Goldwater called the lines a paraphrase of Cicero, but scholars say the sentiments have also been expressed by historical figures ranging from America’s founding fathers to the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr.) Delegates applauded thunderously. But the national reaction was largely negative. Democrats and liberal commentators pounced, reiterating charges that Mr. Goldwater was untrustworthy. Even to many Republican voters, the lines confirmed suspicions that he was a reactionary, as moderate Republican foes like Gov. Nelson A. Rockefeller of New York and Gov. William W. Scranton of Pennsylvania had been saying. In an interview with New York magazine in 2012, Mr. Jaffa said he had never thought that Mr. Goldwater would win. “The country was very prosperous, the Vietnam War was just a small cloud on our horizon, and Kennedy had just been assassinated,” he said. “I thought of the Goldwater campaign as an attempt to educate the American people and the conservative movement itself, which I hoped to influence.” In the general election, Mr. Goldwater was trounced by President Lyndon B. Johnson, the Texas Democrat who had succeeded to the Oval Office a year earlier after the assassination of President John F. Kennedy. Mr. Goldwater carried only six states. Afterward, many analysts said that the Republican Party was hopelessly divided and that Mr. Goldwater and his ultraconservative philosophy were politically dead. Image Dr. Jaffa speaking at the Claremont Institute in 2005. Credit The Claremont Institute But the opposite was true. Mr. Goldwater’s defeat masked a subtler shift in the political landscape. He had in fact wrested control of the Republican Party from the Eastern liberals who had long dominated it. He served three more terms in the Senate, and by 1980, when Ronald Reagan was elected president, Mr. Goldwater was being hailed as the elder statesman of a rising new conservative tide that would one day flood the land. Harry Victor Jaffa was born in New York City on Oct. 7, 1918, the son of Arthur and Frances Landau Jaffa. He graduated from Yale University with a degree in English in 1939. In 1942, he married Marjorie Butler. She died in 2010. Besides his daughter, Dr. Jaffa is survived by two sons, Donald and Philip, and three grandchildren. After teaching at Queens College and the City College of New York and at the University of Chicago in the 1940s, he earned a doctorate in 1951 at the New School for Social Research in New York. He studied there under Dr. Strauss, a refugee from Nazi Germany who articulated political philosophies that influenced the neoconservative movement. Dr. Jaffa taught at Ohio State University from 1951-64, and over the next 25 years was on the faculties of Claremont McKenna College and Claremont Graduate School in Claremont, Calif. He was the Henry Salvatori research professor of political philosophy from 1971-89, when he became professor emeritus and a distinguished fellow at the Claremont Institute. Clashing with other conservatives over the meaning of the Declaration of Independence and varying interpretations of the Constitution, Dr. Jaffa collected many of his articles in books, including “Equality and Liberty: Theory and Practice in American Politics” (1965), “The Conditions of Freedom: Essays in Political Philosophy” (1975) and “American Conservatism and the American Founding” (1984). His best-known Lincoln books are “Crisis of the House Divided: An Interpretation of the Issues in the Lincoln-Douglas Debates,” first published in 1959, and “A New Birth of Freedom: Abraham Lincoln and the Coming of the Civil War” (2000). In “Crisis,” he summarized what he saw as the difference between Lincoln and Douglas in their views of popular government. “Douglas’s doctrine of ‘popular sovereignty’ meant no more than that: in a democracy justice is the interest of the majority, which is ‘the stronger,’ ” he wrote. “Lincoln, however, insisted that the case for popular government depended upon a standard of right and wrong independent of mere opinion and one which was not justified merely by the counting of heads.” Other books by Dr. Jaffa include “Original Intent and the Framers of the Constitution” (1994) and “Storm Over the Constitution” (1999). Dr. Jaffa remained loyal to Mr. Goldwater, arguing that he played a crucial role in the conservative movement. “I made a speech in 1965 where I told people that the reputation of the Goldwater campaign would be determined by events that had not yet happened,” he told New York magazine. “That was a pretty good prediction. It gave us a platform, and it gave a great impetus to the conservative movement. Even when we went down to what looked like a bad defeat.” A version of this article appears in print on , on Page A 19 of the New York edition with the headline: Harry V. Jaffa, Conservative Scholar and Muse for Goldwater, Dies at 96 . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              