   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index International Home Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Allan J. MacEachen, a Force in Bringing Public Health Care to Canada, Dies at 96 Image On a visit to Washington in 1975, Allan J. MacEachen, left, attended a performance at the National Theater with Secretary of State Henry A. Kissinger. Credit John Duricka/Associated Press By  Ian Austen Sept. 19, 2017 Allan J. MacEachen, Canada’s first deputy prime minister and a legislator whose mastery of parliamentary politics ensured the country’s adoption of national health care and other far-reaching social programs, died on Sept. 12 in Antigonish, Nova Scotia. He was 96. His estate announced his death, at a hospital there. Mr. MacEachen lived in East Ainslie Lake, Nova Scotia, on Cape Breton Island, the area where he was born and which he represented as a member of Parliament. Over the decades he sat in the House of Commons and the Senate, where he was appointed as a member of the Liberal Party. Mr. MacEachen was a key parliamentary operative for two Liberal Party prime ministers, Lester B. Pearson and Pierre Elliot Trudeau, and held several senior cabinet positions under them. “Apart from prime ministers, MacEachen was probably the most significant parliamentarian of the postwar era,” said Tom Axworthy, who was Mr. Trudeau’s principal secretary. “Mr. Trudeau didn’t do anything in the House without first getting the views of MacEachen.” Mr. Pearson was a former diplomat and Nobel Peace Prize laureate when his government moved to introduce the federal funding that created public health care across Canada in 1966. But he was not skilled at parliamentary maneuvering, and his government lacked a majority of votes in the House of Commons. Parties on the right, with the support of the private health insurance industry, rejected the plan, saying it would intrude on provincial powers, undermine doctors and cost too much. Mr. MacEachen, who was minister of health and welfare in the Pearson government, found himself fighting cabinet colleagues who thought that the plan would be financially ruinous. At the same time, the New Democratic Party, which was to the left of the Liberals, criticized the proposal for not going far enough in its medical coverage. It wanted dental care, prescription drugs and other services, like eyeglasses, to be covered as well. It is generally accepted that Mr. MacEachen was largely responsible for winning over the New Democrats, allowing the legislation to pass and then, as health minister, pushing government administrators to implement the new system swiftly. At Mr. MacEachen’s funeral on Sunday in Antigonish, a small town about 35 miles west of Cape Breton Island, Prime Minister Justin Trudeau, a Liberal and the son of Pierre Trudeau, said Mr. MacEachen’s political skills had been essential to the introduction of universal health care and other social programs, including an expanded national pension plan for low-income Canadians. “Canadians are living in a country that Allan J. built, and they like it,” the Canadian Press news agency quoted Mr. Trudeau as saying. “Seniors are living in dignity because of the old-age supplement. We all enjoy health care according to our needs, rather than our ability to pay.” Image Mr. MacEachen addressing the East-West Conference on Security in Stockholm in 1984. Credit United Press International In addition to having an encyclopedic knowledge of parliamentary rules and precedents, Mr. Axworthy said, Mr. MacEachen maintained a network of contacts in all the political parties and, just as important, demonstrated a remarkable political sixth sense. “Allan had an almost innate ability to go into the House like a bloodhound and sniff the atmosphere,” he said. In 1977, the elder Mr. Trudeau honored Mr. MacEachen by creating the title deputy prime minister and appointing him to the role, a position that carries no special powers or duties. One of Canada’s least expected political reversals came in 1979, when the Liberals were out of power and Mr. Trudeau announced that he was quitting as the party’s leader. Mr. MacEachen stepped in as interim leader and, weeks later, engineered t he defeat of the Conservative government in a parliamentary vote. Mr. MacEachen then persuaded the Liberals to take Mr. Trudeau back as leader. After his return as prime minister, Mr. Trudeau achieved his lifelong goal of getting Parliament and the provinces, except Quebec, to approve a Canadian constitution to replace the 19th-century British legislation under which the country had been governed. Allan Joseph MacEachen was born on July 6, 1921, in Inverness, on Cape Breton Island, to Angus MacEachen, a coal miner, and the former Annie Gillies. Like many in the region, his family was impoverished. He outlived his three brothers and two sisters and left no immediate survivors. On a scholarship, Mr. MacEachen attended St. Francis Xavier University in Antigonish. There, he later said, he was greatly influenced by the Rev. Moses Coady , a Roman Catholic priest and professor from Cape Breton who promoted adult education and cooperative groups on the island to improve the lives of the poor there. After earning his undergraduate degree, Mr. MacEachen went on to acquire a master’s degree in political economy at the University of Toronto, studied economics at the University of Chicago and started doctoral studies in economics and social science at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology before returning to St. Francis Xavier as a professor of economics. Mr. MacEachen successfully ran for Parliament in 1953 and was re-elected eight times and defeated once. He left the Senate 1996 at the mandatory retirement age of 75. In the introduction to a book of essays about his political career, Mr. MacEachen described being in a cooperative store in Cape Breton shortly after he announced that he would not seek re-election in 1984. “You certainly kept bread on the table here in the north all those years,” Mr. MacEachen quoted one constituent, a farmworker, as telling him. He added: “As a compliment it was enormous as a summation of one’s political career from a citizen who made a living the hard way. It was heartwarming.” Follow Ian Austen on Twitter: @ianrausten  A version of this article appears in print on , on Page B 14 of the New York edition with the headline: Allan J. MacEachen, 96; Forged Policy in Canada . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              