   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Weddings Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Abigail Coster, Alejo Cabranes Image July 30, 2017 Abigail Flynn Coster, a daughter of Sarah Grygiel Coster and Dr. Jeffrey S. Coster of Clifton, Va., was married July 25 to Alejo Richard Stith Cabranes, a son of Kate Stith and Judge José A. Cabranes of Bethany, Conn. Jesse M. Furman, a judge of the United States District Court for the Southern District of New York, officiated in his chambers at the Thurgood Marshall United States Court House in New York. On Aug. 5, Alex J. Konik, a friend of both from law school, is to lead the couple in their vows at the Salamander Resort in Middleburg, Va. The couple met in 2011, on the first day of law school at Columbia, from which each received a law degree. She was a Harlan Fiske Stone scholar. The bride, 28, is a litigation associate at the New York law firm Schulte Roth & Zabel. She graduated with distinction from the University of Virginia. The bride's father, a podiatrist, is the chairman of the department of surgery at Inova Alexandria Hospital and the managing partner of Alexandria Podiatry Associates, a group practice, both in Alexandria, Va. The groom, 31, is a litigation associate at the New York law firm Hughes Hubbard & Reed. He graduated from Dartmouth, and from 2008 to 2009 was a James B. Reynolds Fellow at the University of Ljubljana in Slovenia, where he studied how the privatization of Slovenia’s banking system contributed to the formation of its democracy. The groom’s mother is the Lafayette S. Foster Professor of Law at Yale. She is on the board of governors of the Yale University Press and on the board of the Women’s Campaign School at Yale, whose mission is to put women into elected and appointed office. His father is a judge of the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit, with his main chambers in New Haven, and an appointed member of the three-judge United States Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court of Review in Washington. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page ST 12 of the New York edition with the headline: Abigail Coster, Alejo Cabranes . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              