   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index U.S. Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Hawaii Wants to Be Prepared for a Nuclear Attack by North Korea Image State officials like Toby Clairmont, the Hawaii Emergency Management Agency’s executive officer, are pushing to prepare the state’s 1.3 million citizens for the possibility of a nuclear attack. Credit Jennifer Sinco Kelleher/Associated Press By  Christine Hauser July 25, 2017 查看简体中文版 查看繁體中文版 The latest summer advice for Hawaii goes beyond using adequate sun block and properly riding out a tropical storm. The state’s emergency management authorities recently released official guidelines on how to survive a nuclear detonation: Seek shelter in a blast-resistant structure, and do it in minutes. Also take note: The light from the blast can damage your eyes. But why now? Rising tensions with North Korea have put the possibility of a total wipeout on the radar of the archipelago’s population of more than 1.4 million . On July 5, the United States toughened its military pressure and invective against the Communist nation after North Korea  conducted a successful test of an intercontinental ballistic missile that appeared capable of hitting America’s two most western states: Alaska and Hawaii. The United States described the test as a “dangerous escalation” in what has become a crisis for the Trump administration. Three weeks later, on Friday, Hawaii’s Emergency Management Agency released guidelines running through the steps that could help in surviving a nuclear blast hitting a city or beachside community. Listen to the radio for instructions, it said. Pick your shelter as best you can, preferably one made of concrete; there are no designated blast or fallout shelters in Hawaii, it said. Then, be prepared to stay there for 14 days or until the all clear is given. Late on Monday, the state’s governor, David Ige, held his office’s first Facebook Live session . The event was a decidedly casual affair, with officials in print shirts and big smiles. There were apologies for the slow Wi-Fi, and staff members waved into the camera or reached over Governor Ige’s shoulder to fiddle with the transmission feed as thousands watched. “Today’s topic really is about emergency management and emergency preparedness, including the conversation of the week, which is really about North Korea,” said Governor Ige, though he said any threat was “unlikely.” After a few minutes of pleasantries and information about hurricane season in the Pacific, the governor and his co-host, Vern Miyagi, the emergency management agency administrator, paused to scrutinize the scroll on the screen for their first audience query. “We have a question,” said Governor Ige, apparently new to this. “If North Korea sends a bomb, do we have a bomb to send back?” he read. The two men chuckled, nervously, it appeared. “That’s a very, very good question,” said Mr. Miyagi. “My job right now — I am not in the military,” he said, adding, “I would defer to the active-duty military on that question.” Governor Ige jumped in, referring to his recent conversations with Admiral Harry B. Harris Jr. at the U.S. Pacific Command headquarters on Oahu. “As you know, we are working with the Department of Defense to assure the defense of Hawaii in general,” he said. “There are definitely a lot of conversations. We are assessing the specific defense posture of Hawaii, and as you know, there are many assets here in Hawaii that the D.O.D is interested in protecting. “The possibility of a missile or bomb from North Korea is very, very low,” he added. “It is a very unlikely event. Our whole focus is to make sure that we are prepared.” Officials have been working on the ideas and new guidelines since late last year, after multiple missile tests in North Korea but before this month’s successful firing. New measures include nuclear drills in public schools, which start on August 7. After hurricanes, tsunamis, earthquakes and heavy flooding, a missile threat from North Korea does not rank high. “It is very low compared to the potential threat from a hurricane,” Lt. Col. Charles Anthony, a spokesman for the state defense department, said in a telephone interview. “But we still have to prepare for all hazards.” In 2009, when the Obama administration announced that North Korea could launch a ballistic missile in Hawaii’s direction, the United States military strengthened defenses there. The Defense Department said antimissile interceptors were in place, and people in Hawaii were treated to the spectacle of a giant, towering radar commonly known as the golf ball as it set out to sea from the base where it is normally moored. Image Credit A.J. Chavar/The New York Times Mr. Miyagi said civil defense administrators were working to coordinate a plan across all the state’s islands. Residents were advised to keep medication supplies up-to-date and accessible. The authorities are testing new attack alert sirens as well. But the two officials repeatedly said that any nuclear event was unlikely, adding that the new public safety campaign was enacted out of an abundance of caution. “I have been asked, ‘Why now?’ It’s just that they have been testing and testing and testing,” said Mr. Miyagi, speaking of North Korea, which is about 5,000 miles away. “Although the chances of this happening is remote, the probability is very low and unlikely, we just have to get ahead of it and answer the question — what is Hawaii doing?” Mr. Miyagi said. “The threat is low. Hawaii is safe.” The Hawaii Tribune Herald reported on Tuesday that Hawaii is the first state to enact an emergency campaign to prepare for any nuclear attack by North Korea. “In some ways, the growing nuclear threat posed by the Southeast Asia nation feels closer than ever to Hawaii’s shores,” it said. Many among the governor’s Facebook Live audience members had disaster on their minds. “There is nowhere we as the people of these islands could go for safety we are all DEAD,” one wrote in the streaming comments. Image Credit KCNA, via Associated Press A version of this article appears in print on , on Page A 9 of the New York edition with the headline: Emergency Plans in Hawaii Now Include a Nuclear Blast . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Related Coverage Intelligence Agencies Say North Korean Missile Could Reach U.S. in a Year July 25, 2017 Image U.S. Nuclear Weapons Tests Come to YouTube March 17, 2017 Image What Is Hawaii? April 21, 2017 Image Show All Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              