   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Arts Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Times Critics’ Guide: What to Do This Week By  The New York Times June 8, 2015 Looking to break out of your cultural rut? The Times’s critics have you covered. Movies ‘What We Do in the Shadows’ Set in modern-day Wellington, New Zealand, Jemaine Clement and Taika Waititi’s weird and witty mockumentary turns the daily lives of four vampire housemates into a dotty look at oldsters struggling to adapt to an unwelcoming modernity. (Jeannette Catsoulis) (No rating, 1:25. Read the review or find a streaming option .) Image Pop Music Girlpool In his review of the duo’s new album, “Before the World Was Big,” Ben Ratliff writes: These songs, written and sung with more subtlety since the group’s first EP from late last year, tend to fixate on relationships and change: leaving places, growing apart, growing up. It’s an extended eulogy to childhood and the sense of a limited universe. (Read the full review or listen on Spotify .) Image Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater performing at Lincoln Center in 2014. Credit Ruth Fremson/The New York Times Dance Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater The company opens its Lincoln Center engagement on Wednesday with the Ailey Spirit Gala, featuring young dancers from Ailey II, the Ailey School and AileyCamp. On Thursday, the hip-hop choreographer Rennie Harris unveils his new “Exodus,” a darkness-to-light journey set to house and gospel music, alongside a new production of Talley Beatty’s 1960 “Toccata,” Christopher Wheeldon’s “After the Rain” pas de deux and Alvin Ailey’s “Revelations.” To ring in Mr. Harris’s premiere, Thursday’s events begin outdoors at 6 p.m. with a house dance class taught by Eddie Stockton. Siobhan Burke (Wednesday through June 21. Find more at ailey.org .) Image Hans Krüsi's “Cow Machine.” Credit Hiroko Masuike/The New York Times Art American Folk Art Museum: ‘When the Curtain Never Comes Down’ A sprawling cacophony of objects, audiotapes, photographs and films is here orchestrated into a curatorial marvel. Strange and wonderful in numerous ways, the show sheds new light on the performance aspects of much outsider art while reminding us how eccentricity is not only basic to creativity but also to personal liberty and democracy itself. Roberta Smith (Through July 5. Read the full review . More at folkartmuseum.org .) Image Buddy Guy Credit Matt Roberts/Getty Images Jazz Blue Note Jazz Festival Now celebrating its fifth anniversary, this festival runs all month long at a clutch of affiliated spaces in Manhattan. Highlights in the coming week include the veteran blues man Buddy Guy, on Tuesday and Wednesday at 8 p.m. at the B. B. King Blues Club & Grill; the Bad Plus with the tenor saxophonist Joshua Redman, drawing from a new album, on Wednesday at 7:30 and 10 p.m. at the Highline Ballroom; and the drummer Roy Haynes, headlining the Blue Note Jazz Club on Tuesday and Wednesday, with sets at 8 and 10:30 p.m. Nate Chinen (Through June 30. A full schedule is at bluenotejazzfestival.com .) Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              