   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Opinion Supported by Letters Trump Critics, All Around July 21, 2017 Image President Trump in New Jersey. Credit Eric Thayer for The New York Times To the Editor: Re “ Trump Mauls the Language ” (column, July 17): Charles M. Blow performs an important national service by putting into context some of Donald Trump’s stranger locutions. “Beautiful” is always a term of flattery and finagling. “A lot of people don’t know that” means that (perhaps only) Donald Trump himself didn’t know it. It is vital to our national interests for each of us to take note of such seemingly meaningless phrases and analyze Mr. Trump’s purpose in using them. He is comfortable thinking that we aren’t listening when he throws up a cloud of verbal dust to hide the facts as they stand. I hope that Mr. Blow will continue to call out these less than innocent usages so that we can all pay attention and learn Mr. Trump’s true agenda. REBECCA J. KURLAND OAKLAND, CALIF. To the Editor: The obfuscation seen in President Trump’s talks and tweets is far more dangerous than any of the “tricks” George Orwell discusses in his famous essay “Politics and the English Language.” It is not just that Mr. Trump uses meaningless words like “beautiful” (the fourth “trick” Orwell discusses). It is also that the way he combines words in what only appears to be a coherent statement neutralizes the meanings of the individual words in the combination, making the totality meaningless even if the individual words are not. A result is verbal Muzak, the political equivalent of the background music in supermarkets used to put customers into a light trance, heighten their suggestibility and get them to buy on impulse when passing a colorful grocery display. Will Democrats and independents be able to snap their fingers loud enough? Will Mr. Trump’s base wake up to discover that the goods displayed have always been rotten? ROBERT S. KIRSNER LOS ANGELES The writer is a linguist. To the Editor: Re “ Moral Vacuum in the House of Trump ” (column, July 14): David Brooks’s column is right on. What defies belief to many Americans is that the Trump administration does not believe that it is guilty of any wrongdoing. For people who feel this way, it may be helpful to realize that, in the business world, such dealings are sometimes not only considered not wrong but actually wise. The Trump administration has brought the problems of the business world to the White House. The best way to remedy this situation is to use our democratic voting process to rid us of this administration and bring normal government, with all its faults, back to our country. RAYMOND SJODIN, BALTIMORE To the Editor: I appreciate David Brooks’s account of how Donald Trump and his son Donald Jr. were led morally off kilter by their fathers’ examples, but how do we account for the silence of Vice President Mike Pence, the Senate majority leader, Mitch McConnell, and Speaker Paul D. Ryan? Did their moral obtuseness come from amoral fathers or grandfathers? (I doubt it.) For that matter, what are the wellsprings of moral clarity and courage? Donald Trump remains president only because the Republican majorities in Congress excuse his behavior by their silence and apologetics. DOUGLAS C. BENNETT TOPSHAM, ME. To the Editor: Re “ Couldn’t We Just Trade Presidents ?,” by Gail Collins (column, July 15): It is sad when our former presidents don’t say anything about the destruction of the office of the president. You would think that they might get together — it doesn’t matter what party they belong to — and denounce President Trump for the way he behaves. It leaves me sick to see these former presidents in their special group doing nothing. OLIVER STEINDECKER SOUTHAMPTON, N.Y. To the Editor: Re “ How to Restore Government Ethics in the Trump Era ” (Op-Ed, nytimes.com, July 19): Walter M. Shaub Jr.’s essay is a devastating indictment of Donald Trump, who brings all the slime of unethical business management practices to the already tawdry business of politics. So much for “draining the swamp.” The swamp has overtaken the politics, and the resulting mess will kill us all, either through infection or neglect. It makes me sick. RENA CHARNIN MUELLER PHILADELPHIA To the Editor: Re “ Vetoed Claim: Trump Is No. 1 in Bills Signed ” (front page, July 18): As the article points out, the 15 laws reversing Obama regulations may represent President Trump’s “broadest legislative impact.” I wonder if this is what his supporters had in mind when they voted for him. Here’s a suggestion for a poll that could be revealing: Ask people if they approve of these recently reversed rules, or not. The pollsters should not tie President Barack Obama’s name or President Trump’s to any of them. Yes or no: “Would you support a rule that … ” Let’s see the results by party affiliation. I suspect that they will be surprising. MARVIN KAPLAN WESTFIELD, N.J. To the Editor: “ The Trump Vision for America Abroad ,” by Gary D. Cohn and H.R. McMaster (Op-Ed, July 13) , strikes me as nothing less than pure propaganda, intended to cover the chaotic mess of Donald Trump’s thinking about anything, domestic or foreign. In fact, the only “vision” that I have heard or read from President Trump himself has been that of darkness and paranoia, instilling fear and bigotry in the population — a reflection, it seems, of Mr. Trump’s mind. Mr. Cohn, the director of the National Economic Council, and General McMaster, the national security adviser, insult thinking Americans who know better. Their article only reinforces the Orwellian atmosphere Mr. Trump and his defenders have created in our country. I don’t know much about Mr. Cohn, but sadly it appears that General McMaster has sold his soul to the devil. CANDACE BRALEY, SEATTLE To the Editor: Re “ Tough Times for Disciples of Ayn Rand ,” by James B. Stewart (Common Sense column, July 14): I find it interesting that President Trump named the militant atheist Ayn Rand as his favorite writer and “The Fountainhead” as his favorite novel. This is the same man who hypocritically declared during his campaign that the Bible was his favorite book, even quoting from “Two Corinthians,” while relentlessly pandering to the evangelical community, whose overwhelming support put him in the White House. Rand’s contempt for Christianity and religion in general as destructive superstitions fostering altruism, which she viewed as a form of self-imposed slavery, formed an integral part of her Alpha Male-worshiping ideology, which Mr. Trump, based on his long business career and his actions as president, apparently embraces with enthusiasm, even as he extols the virtues of faith every chance he gets. I suspect that the president did not discuss his favorite author with the clerics who joined him a few days ago in the Oval Office for a prayer meeting. DENNIS MIDDLEBROOKS BROOKLYN The writer is a co-founder and a former president of the Secular Humanist Society of New York. To the Editor: Referring to Donald Trump, a July 19 letter writer says, “Rather than trying to bring the two parties together, to be a peacemaker, this president seems to be widening the gulf between the parties and lashing out for his own losses.” She goes on to ask, “How did we get in this position?” The answer is simple: a politically apathetic and historically uninformed citizenry, blindly led by a populist salesman, who pulled the lever in his favor. Until a majority of Americans pay closer attention to politics, we are doomed to these kind of outcomes. MICHAEL HADJIARGYROU CENTERPORT, N.Y. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page SR 10 of the New York edition with the headline: Trump Critics, All Around . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              