   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Opinion Supported by Letters Did the F.B.I. Play the Email Controversy Right? Nov. 7, 2016 To the Editor: Re “ F.B.I. Says Review Clears Clinton in Email Inquiry ” (front page, Nov. 7): The announcement by James B. Comey, the F.B.I. director, clearing Hillary Clinton cannot undo the damage done a week before. How many million ballots were cast with the first proclamation of the director ringing in voters’ ears? How many went into the polling booth or mailed in their vote assuming that a smoking gun was hidden in the trove of emails on Anthony Weiner’s computer? How many races, not only for president but also down ballot, were seriously affected by the reckless statement and the imagined implications of the words uttered by the director of the F.B.I. in the early voting process? These questions hang over this election with as much weight as a Florida chad. While their answers are unknowable, the consequences of one horribly wrong speculation, only now shown to be wholly unfounded and without merit, are undeniable. And Donald Trump’s wild accusations of a “rigged” election could in fact prove prescient. Only not in the direction he would suggest. ROBERT S. NUSSBAUM Fort Lee, N.J. To the Editor: The F.B.I.’s email flap has apparently run its course and everyone is unhappy. But maybe we shouldn’t be. James B. Comey, the F.B.I. director, was faced with an impossible choice: keep the existence of the new emails confidential, or tell the world exactly what he was doing. Any normal, nonpolitical investigation would have remained confidential. But in the superheated world of Washington, nothing of political consequence remains confidential for long. Mr. Comey’s instinct won out: He just said exactly what he was doing and let the chips fall. And then he got the job done quickly. There are a lot worse instincts in a democracy: Imagine a hundred other guys in Washington (including F.B.I. directors and presidents) who might have played it the other way. In hindsight, we did well with Mr. Comey in charge. KARL BELGUM Tiburon, Calif. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page A 18 of the New York edition with the headline: Did the F.B.I. Play the Email Controversy Right? . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              