   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Survey Says Should Obama Pick Nominee? Your Answer May Depend on How Much History You Know Image Abe Fortas in 1967 with his Supreme Court clerks. He was blocked from becoming chief justice a year later. Credit George Tames/The New York Times By  Kevin Quealy Feb. 17, 2016 The Senate is preparing for a no-holds-barred battle over whether it should even consider President Obama’s choice to replace Antonin Scalia on the Supreme Court. Not surprisingly, Americans are divided by political party about whether Mr. Obama should be the one to nominate the replacement, a new online poll shows. But there is also a fascinating wrinkle. The more people are told about the history of Supreme Court nominations, the more they tend to agree that the Senate should consider the president’s nomination, not delay it. Forty-six percent of registered voters said that the next justice should be nominated by the president this year, and 39 percent said the winner of the 2016 presidential election should be the one to put forth a nominee, according to a poll conducted Monday and Tuesday by Morning Consult, a digital media and polling company. (The remaining 15 percent of respondents said they didn’t know or had no opinion.) While 75 percent of those surveyed said they had heard “some” or “a lot” about the death of Mr. Scalia, it’s unclear whether survey respondents were familiar with the historical context of Supreme Court vacancies — particularly with how long on average a seat remains vacant . That’s mostly because Supreme Court vacancies don’t happen very often, and election-year vacancies are rarer still. The last time a vacancy occurred during a president’s last year in office was almost 50 years ago, under Lyndon B. Johnson (although the vacancy occurred later, in June). A hostile Senate successfully blocked the nomination of Abe Fortas to chief justice; a New York Times editorial had the headline “Defeat for Democracy.” With this in mind, we asked Morning Consult to add a small number of questions to the survey, about whether respondents’ views would change if they knew more information, like the average number of days from the time of nomination to a vote on a successor (25), the longest number of days for that process in a nominee’s confirmation (125) and the length of Mr. Obama’s remaining term in office (340). When given more historical context, respondents were more likely to say the justice should be nominated this year. This new information persuaded Democrats most and independents somewhat less so. But it does suggest a little history may be a persuasive tool for Democrats in the nomination battle to come. Morning Consult, which began as a health newsletter in 2009 and now conducts a weekly online poll, surveyed 1,763 registered voters. About 68 percent of Democrats surveyed said they wanted a nominee this year, and about 66 percent of Republicans surveyed said they wanted the next president to choose. The results suggest that partisanship — or, more directly, Mr. Obama — is a key element in shaping opinion. When the pollsters phrased the question differently, asking whether President Obama or the winner of the 2016 presidential election should nominate the next justice, instead of simply what year the choice should be made, the number of respondents saying the next president should decide increased to 44 percent, from 39 percent. Correction :  An Upshot article on Wednesday about the effect of historical knowledge on views in a poll on how to proceed with replacing Antonin Scalia on the Supreme Court misstated the number of terms served by President Lyndon B. Johnson, who was the last president to have a Supreme Court vacancy occur during his last year in office. After completing the term of John F. Kennedy, President Johnson had one term of his own, not two.  The Upshot provides news, analysis and graphics about politics, policy and everyday life. Follow us on Facebook and Twitter . Sign up for our newsletter. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page A 3 of the New York edition with the headline: History Affects Views of Supreme Court Nomination . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              