   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Art & Design Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by 24 Art Exhibitions to View in NYC This Weekend Image “Massive Black Hole in the Dark Heart of Our Milky Way” is part of Danh Vo’s first museum survey, which closes on Wednesday at the Guggenheim. Credit Vincent Tullo for The New York Times May 3, 2018 Our guide to new art shows and some that will be closing soon. ‘TARSILA DO AMARAL: INVENTING MODERN ART IN BRAZIL’ at the Museum of Modern Art (through June 3). The subtitle is no overstatement: In the early 1920s, first in Paris and then back home in São Paulo, Brazil, this painter really did lay the groundwork for the coming of modernism in Latin America’s most populous nation. Tired of the European pretenders in Brazil’s art academies, Tarsila (who was always called by her first name) began to intermingle Western, African and indigenous motifs into flowing, biomorphic paintings, and to theorize a new national culture fueled by the principle of antropofagia, or “cannibalism.” Along with spare, assured drawings of Rio and the Brazilian countryside, this belated but very welcome show assembles Tarsila’s three most important paintings, including the classic “Abaporu” (1928): a semi-human nude with a spindly nose and a comically swollen foot. (Jason Farago) 212-708-9400, moma.org ‘BEFORE THE FALL: GERMAN AND AUSTRIAN ART OF THE 1930S’ at Neue Galerie (through May 28). An exhibition in the form of a chokehold , the third of the Neue Galerie’s recent shows on art and German politics pushes into the years of dictatorship, with paintings, drawings and photographs by artists deemed “degenerate” by the Nazis — as well as by those who joined the party or who thought they could shut out the catastrophe. (You will know the dissidents, like Max Beckmann and Oskar Kokoschka; the fascists and sellouts are less known.) Gazing at macabre still lifes of dolls and dead flowers, or dreamy landscapes in imitation of an earlier German Romanticism, you may ask to what degree artists are responsible for the times in which they work. But then you see “Self-Portrait in the Camp,” by the Jewish German painter Felix Nussbaum — made between his escape from a French internment camp and his deportation to Auschwitz — and you know that there can be no pardon. (Farago) 212-628-6200, neuegalerie.org ‘HUMA BHABHA: WE COME IN PEACE’ at the Metropolitan Museum of Art (through Oct. 28). This spare and unsettling sculptural installation for the Iris and B. Gerald Cantor Roof Garden Commission includes two figures: one that is somewhat humanoid but with a ferocious mask-face and that visually dwarfs the jagged Manhattan skyline behind it, and another bowing in supplication or prayer, with long cartoonish human hands and a scraggly tail emerging from its shiny, black drapery. The title is a variant on the line an alien uttered to an anxious crowd in the 1951 science-fiction movie “The Day the Earth Stood Still,” but it ripples with other associations: colonization, invasion, imperialism or missionaries and other foreigners whose intentions were not always innocent. The installation also feels like an extension of the complex, cross-cultural conversation going on downstairs, inside a museum packed with 5,000 years of art history. (Martha Schwendener) 212-535-7710, metmuseum.org ‘DIAMOND MOUNTAINS: TRAVEL AND NOSTALGIA IN KOREAN ART’ at the Metropolitan Museum of Art (through May 20) . Mount Kumgang, or the “Diamond Mountain,” lies about 90 miles from Pyeongchang’s Olympic Stadium, but it’s a world away: The august, multipeaked range lies in North Korea and has been impossible to visit for most of the past seven decades. Featuring stunning loans from the National Museum of Korea and other institutions in Seoul, South Korea, this melancholy beauty of a show assembles three centuries’ worth of paintings of the Diamond Mountain range, and explores how landscapes intermingle nostalgia, nationalism, legend and regret. The unmissable prizes here are the painstaking paintings of Jeong Seon, the 18th-century artist who is perhaps the greatest of all Korean painters. And later impressions of the mountains, including a blotchy vision from the Paris-based modernist Lee Ungno, give a deeper historical weight to very live geopolitics. (Farago) 212-535-7710 , metmuseum.org ‘THE FACE OF DYNASTY: ROYAL CRESTS FROM WESTERN CAMEROON’ at the Metropolitan Museum of Art (through Sept. 3). In the African wing, a show of just four commanding wooden crowns constitutes a blockbuster in its own right. These massive wooden crests — in the form of stylized human faces with vast vertical brows — served as markers of royal power among the Bamileke peoples of the Cameroonian grasslands, and the Met’s recent acquisition of an 18th-century specimen is joined here by three later examples, each featuring sharply protruding cheeks, broadly smiling mouths and brows incised with involute geometric patterns. Ritual objects like these were decisive for the development of Western modernist painting, and a Cameroonian crest was even shown at MoMA in the 1930s, as a “sculpture” divorced from ethnography. But these crests had legal and diplomatic significance as well as aesthetic appeal, and their anonymous African creators had a political understanding of art not so far from our own. (Farago) 212-535-7710 , metmuseum.org ‘THE JIM HENSON EXHIBITION’ at the Museum of the Moving Image. The rainbow connection has been established in Astoria, Queens, where this museum has opened a new permanent wing devoted to the career of America’s great puppeteer, who was born in Mississippi in 1936 and died, too young, in 1990. Henson began presenting the short TV program “Sam and Friends” before he was out of his teens; one of its characters, the soft-faced Kermit, was fashioned from his mother’s old coat and would not mature into a frog for more than a decade. The influence of early variety television, with its succession of skits and songs, runs through “Sesame Street” and “The Muppet Show,” though Henson also spent the late 1960s crafting peace-and-love documentaries and prototyping a psychedelic nightclub. Young visitors will delight in seeing Big Bird, Elmo, Miss Piggy and the Swedish Chef; adults can dig deep into sketches and story boards and rediscover some old friends. (Farago) 718-784-0077, movingimage.us ‘PETER HUJAR: SPEED OF LIFE’ at the Morgan Library and Museum (through May 20). It’s hard to say which is more surprising: that Peter Hujar’s photographs of underground life in New York in the 1970s and ’80s have found their way to the Morgan Library and Museum, or that the classically minded institution has become unbuttoned enough to exhibit them in this heartbreaker of a show . Hujar (1934-87) lived most of his professional life in the East Village and, through studio portraits and cityscapes, captured a downtown that has since been all but erased by time, gentrification and AIDS. Although he was little known by the mainstream art world in his lifetime, this show, startlingly tender, reveals him to be one of the major American photographers of the late 20th century. (Holland Cotter) 212-685-0008, themorgan.org ‘THE INCOMPLETE ARAKI’ at the Museum of Sex (through Aug. 31). It remains a bit of a tourist trap, but the for-profit Museum of Sex is making its most serious bid yet for artistic credibility with a two-floor exhibition of Japan’s most prominent and controversial photographer. Nobuyoshi Araki has spent decades shooting Tokyo streetscapes, blossoming flowers and, notably, women trussed up in the baroque rope bondage technique known as kinbaku-bi, or “the beauty of tight binding.” Given the venue, it’s natural that this show concentrates on the erotic side of his art, but less lustful visitors can discover an ambitious cross section of Mr. Araki’s omnivorous photography, including his lastingly moving “Sentimental Journey,” picturing his beloved wife, Yoko, from honeymoon to funeral. (Farago) 212-689-6337, museumofsex.com ‘ZOE LEONARD: SURVEY’ at the Whitney Museum of American Art (through June 10). Some shows cast a spell. Zoe Leonard’s reverberant retrospective does. Physically ultra-austere, all white walls with a fiercely edited selection of objects — photographs of clouds taken from airplane windows; a mural collaged from vintage postcards; a scattering of empty fruit skins, each stitched closed with needle and thread — it’s an extended essay about travel, time passing, political passion and the ineffable daily beauty of the world. (Cotter) 212-570-3600, whitney.org ‘LIKE LIFE: SCULPTURE, COLOR AND THE BODY (1300 TO NOW)’ at the Met Breuer (through July 22). Taking a second run at the splashy theme-show extravaganza, the Met Breuer has greater success. This one is certainly more coherent since it centers entirely on the body and its role in art, science, religion and entertainment. It gathers together some 120 sculptures, dolls, artist’s dummies, effigies, crucifixes and automatons. Many are rarely lent and may not return any time soon. (Roberta Smith) 212-731-1675, metmuseum.org ‘THE LONG RUN’ at the Museum of Modern Art (through Nov. 4). The museum upends its cherished Modern narrative of ceaseless progress by mostly young (white) men. Instead we see works by artists 45 and older who have just kept on keeping on, regardless of attention or reward, sometimes saving the best for last. Art here is an older person’s game, a pursuit of a deepening personal vision over innovation. Winding through 17 galleries, the installation is alternatively visually or thematically acute and altogether inspiring. (Smith) 212-708-9400, moma.org ‘SALLY MANN: A THOUSAND CROSSINGS’ at the National Gallery of Art, Washington (through May 28). All of this photographer’s strengths are on view in this deftly chosen and admirably displayed exhibition that covers most of her 40-plus-year career. The 108 images here (47 of which have never been exhibited before) provide a provocative tour through Ms. Mann’s accomplishments and serve as a record of exploration — into the past, into this country’s and photography’s history, stamped with a powerful vision. (Vicki Goldberg) 202-737-4215, nga.gov ‘THE METROPOLIS IN LATIN AMERICA, 1830-1930’ at Americas Society (through June 30). Fans of Latin American architecture are overly besotted with the modernist era: Luis Barragán’s color-saturated houses in Mexico City, Oscar Niemeyer’s cutting-edge presidential palace in Brasília. But this eye-opening show turns the clock back 100 years and shows how six cities — Buenos Aires; Havana; Lima, Peru; Mexico City; Rio de Janeiro; and Santiago, Chile — used architecture and urban design to express new national ambitions. Vintage photographs disclose how in Mexico’s sprawling capital its new republican government erected statues of Cuauhtémoc, the last Aztec emperor, while Argentina plowed out lordly avenues in imitation of Haussmann-era Paris. All these cities had keen architectural ambitions, though if you have to pick the most sophisticated, it’s Rio in a landslide. Stare at Marc Ferrez’s jaw-dropping 1895 panoramic photograph of the erstwhile Brazilian capital, with Sugarloaf Mountain looming over Botafogo and Flamengo, and book the next flight. (Farago) 212-249-8950, as-coa.org ‘MILLENNIUM: LOWER MANHATTAN IN THE 1990S’ at the Skyscraper Museum (through June 24). This plucky Battery Park institution transports us back to the years of Rudy Giuliani, Lauryn Hill and 128-kilobit modems to reveal the enduring urban legacy of a decade bookended by recession and terror. In the wake of the 1987 stock market crash, landlords in the financial district rezoned their old skyscrapers for residential occupancy, and more than 20 towers were declared landmarks, including the ornate Standard Oil building at 26 Broadway and the home of Delmonico’s at 56 Beaver Street . Battery Park City flowered; yuppies priced out of TriBeCa came down to Wall Street; a new Guggenheim, designed by a fresh-from-Bilbao Frank Gehry, nearly arose by South Street Seaport. From this distance, the 1990s can seem almost like a golden age, not least given that, more than 16 years after Sept. 11, construction at the underwhelming new World Trade Center is still not finished. (Farago) skyscraper.org ‘REBEL SPIRITS: ROBERT F. KENNEDY AND MARTIN LUTHER KING JR.’ at the New-York Historical Society (through May 20). Featuring stark black-and-white photographs of the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. and Robert F. Kennedy, as well as faded ephemera that memorialized them, this exhibition reveals the various ways in which the lives of these two influential figures were juxtaposed. It also traces the circuitous routes that belatedly pointed Kennedy toward the more incendiary goals King set first regarding civil rights, poverty and the Vietnam War. (Sam Roberts) 212-873-3400, nyhistory.org ‘ALBERTO SAVINIO’ at the Center for Italian Modern Art (through June 23). The paintings of this Italian polymath have long been overshadowed by the brilliant work of his older brother, Giorgio de Chirico. This show of more than 20 canvases from the late 1920s to the mid-30s may not change that, but the mix of landscapes with bright patterns and several eerie portraits based on family photographs are surprisingly of the moment. (Smith) 646-370-3596, italianmodernart.org ‘SCENES FROM THE COLLECTION’ at the Jewish Museum. After a surgical renovation to its grand pile on Fifth Avenue, the Jewish Museum has reopened its third-floor galleries with a rethought, refreshed display of its permanent collection , which intermingles 4,000 years of Judaica with modern and contemporary art by Jews and gentiles alike — Mark Rothko, Lee Krasner, Nan Goldin, Cindy Sherman and the excellent young Nigerian draftswoman Ruby Onyinyechi Amanze. The works are shown in a nimble, nonchronological suite of galleries, and some of its century-spanning juxtapositions are bracing; others feel reductive, even dilletantish. But always, the Jewish Museum conceives of art and religion as interlocking elements of a story of civilization, commendably open to new influences and new interpretations. (Farago) 212-423-3200 , thejewishmuseum.org ‘THE SENSES: DESIGN BEYOND VISION’ at the Cooper Hewitt, Smithsonian Design Museum (through Oct. 28). There’s a serious, timely big idea at this exhibition : As social media, smartphones and virtual reality make us ever more “ocularcentric,” we have taken leave of our nonvisual senses — and need to get back in touch, literally. Thus “The Senses” features multisensory adventures such as a portable-speaker-size contraption that emits odors, with titles like “Surfside” and “Einstein,” in timed combinations; hand-painted scratch-and-sniff wallpaper (think Warhol’s patterned cows but with cherries — cherry-scented, naturally); and a device that projects ultrasonic sound waves to simulate the touch and feel of virtual objects. The show also presents commissions, videos, products and prototypes from more than 65 designers and teams, some of which address sensory disabilities like blindness and deafness, including Vibeat, which can be worn as a bracelet, brooch or necklace and translates music into vibrations. And if you bring the kids, they will likely bliss out stroking a wavy, fur-lined installation that makes music as you rub it. (Michael Kimmelman) 212-849-8400, cooperhewitt.org ‘STEPHEN SHORE’ at the Museum of Modern Art (through May 28). Not staged, not lit, not cropped, not retouched, the color photographs of this American master are feats of dispassionate representation. This must-see retrospective — curated with real wit by Quentin Bajac, MoMA’s photo chief — opens with Mr. Shore’s teenage snaps at Andy Warhol’s Factory. Then it turns to the road-trip imagery of “American Surfaces” and the steely precision of “Uncommon Places” — landmarks in photographic history that scandalized an establishment convinced the camera could find beauty solely in black-and-white. Mr. Shore is revealed not only as a peripatetic explorer but also a restless experimenter with new photographic technologies, from stereoscopic slide shows to print-on-demand books. The only flaw is his recent embrace of Instagram, allowing museumgoers to lazily flick through images on MoMA’s smudged iPads. New technologies are great, but not at the expense of concentration. (Farago) 212-708-9400, moma.org ‘2018 TRIENNIAL: SONGS FOR SABOTAGE’ at the New Museum (through May 27). This Bowery museum’s fourth triennial exhibition, “Songs for Sabotage,” is the smallest, tightest edition of the show so far. Immaculately installed, it’s also the best looking. There’s a lot of good work, which is global in scope and not by a list of prevetted up-and-comers. (Zhenya Machneva, Dalton Paula and Daniela Ortiz are artists to look for.) Less admirably, it’s a safe and unchallenging show. Despite a politically demanding time, it acts as if ambiguity and discretion were automatically virtues. In an era when the market rules, it puts its money on the kind of art — easily tradable, displayable, palette-tickling objects — that art fairs suck up. (Cotter) 212-219-1222, newmuseum.org ‘ GRANT WOOD: AMERICAN GOTHIC AND OTHER FABLES’ at the Whitney Museum of American Art (through June 10). This well-done survey begins with the American Regionalist’s little-known efforts as an Arts and Crafts designer and touches just about every base. It includes his mural studies, book illustrations and most of his best-known paintings — including “American Gothic” and “The Midnight Ride of Paul Revere.” Best of all are Wood’s smooth undulant landscapes with their plowmen and spongy trees and infectious serenity. (Smith)  212-570-3600, whitney.org Last Chance ‘THOMAS COLE’S JOURNEY: ATLANTIC CROSSING’ at the Metropolitan Museum of Art (through May 13). The Met’s exhibition of the nation’s first major landscape artist and progenitor of what would be called the Hudson River School is gorgeous, politically right for right now and a lesson in the mutability of art history. Politically, Cole’s art is conservative, but it’s also work that challenges and complicates that term. And this show is precisely about complication. Just as Cole is most realistically and revealingly seen and judged against the background of his time, so is the exhibition, coming as it does in this confounding MAGA moment. (Cotter) 212-535-7710, metmuseum.org ‘OUTLIERS AND AMERICAN VANGUARD ART’ at the National Gallery of Art, Washington (through May 13). Tracing the interaction of taught and untaught artists over the past century, this exhibition tackles an impossibly immense subject and starts stronger than it finishes. But it presents quantities of stunning art in all mediums, revealing the vastness of American creativity and the many attempts by museums to do it justice. It proves more forcefully than ever that the distinction between the works of the self-taught and that of the professionals has outlived its usefulness. (Smith) 202-737-4215, nga.gov ‘DANH VO: TAKE MY BREATH AWAY’ at the Guggenheim Museum (through May 9). This is the first museum survey of the Vietnam-born Danish artist, who draws his art from his life and the history he has lived through, recycling family mementos, found letters and artifacts, as well as random materials, into a very spare, poetic and astute study of power, colonialism, and the lives of refugees and of objects. The Guggenheim’s rotunda looks nearly empty at times, and there are lots of labels to read, but it is ultimately worth it. (Smith)  212-423-3500, guggenheim.org Correction :  A previous version of this article misspelled the first name of an artist with an exhibition at the Guggenheim Museum. He is Danh Vo, not Dahn. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page C 28 of the New York edition with the headline: Art . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Related Coverage 5 Film Series to Catch in NYC This Weekend May 3, 2018 Image 15 Plays and Musicals to Go to in NYC This Weekend May 3, 2018 Image 7 Classical Music Concerts to See in NYC This Weekend May 3, 2018 Image Show All Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              