   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Movies Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Fall 2017 Movie Release Schedule Image Jennifer Lawrence with Javier Bardem in the new Darren Aronofsky drama “Mother!” Credit Paramount Pictures/Protozoa Pictures By  Ben Kenigsberg Sept. 8, 2017 More listings for the new season: Art | Classical | Dance | Pop | Television | Theater September Dates are subject to change. Sept. 12 WRESTLING JERUSALEM Aaron Davidman’s Off Broadway one-man show about the Israeli-Palestinian conflict lives on as a movie. Sept. 13 DAYVEON In a small Arkansas town, a young teenager (Devin Blackmon) is drawn to the excitement of gang life, which tests his loyalty. The first-time feature director Amman Abbasi is said to have consulted actual gang members for accuracy. EX LIBRIS — THE NEW YORK PUBLIC LIBRARY A tireless chronicler of American institutions, Frederick Wiseman, now 87, documents the inner workings of one of the world’s largest and most recognizable library systems, where even phone operators are handy with Middle English, and the photo file is so detailed that it contains a folder of “dogs in action.” Sept. 15 AGAINST THE NIGHT Among the places you might not want to go on late-night excursions with your friends, “abandoned prisons” rank roughly third, behind only “haunted abandoned prisons” and “haunted abandoned prisons once run by wardens who turned their inmates into biochemical test subjects.” AMERICAN ASSASSIN A veteran C.I.A. officer (Michael Keaton) takes a vengeful rookie (Dylan O’Brien) under his wing; together, the kid and his mentor unravel an international plot. Sanaa Lathan, Shiva Negar and Taylor Kitsch also star in this adaptation of Vince Flynn’s best seller. Michael Cuesta directed. BRAD’S STATUS Ben Stiller’s Brad, who works for a nonprofit, is forced to confront his self-perceived mediocrity after a college visit to Boston with his son (Austin Abrams) makes him jealous of his own former college pals’ success. Michael Sheen, Luke Wilson, Jemaine Clement and Mike White play his high-rolling chums. Mr. White, best known for his screenplay for “School of Rock,” wrote and directed. EASY LIVING Adam Keleman’s debut feature is not a remake of the Jean Arthur comedy classic from 1937, written by Preston Sturges, but it does concern old movies, or at least a door-to-door saleswoman (Caroline Dhavernas) who finds them inspirational. EMBARGO A documentary examines the history of the United States’ embargo against Cuba, making the case that the policy has been bad for both countries. EXTRAORDINARY ORDINARY PEOPLE As part of a decades-spanning project, the filmmaker and arts advocate Alan Govenar profiles winners of the National Heritage Fellowship, an award given to traditional and folk artists by the National Endowment for the Arts. Image Sareum Srey Moch in Angelina Jolie’s “First They Killed My Father,” set in Cambodia. Credit Netflix FIRST THEY KILLED MY FATHER Angelina Jolie directs this adaptation of Loung Ung’s memoir of her Cambodian childhood under the Khmer Rouge. Ms. Jolie’s process for casting the young Loung, as described in Vanity Fair , struck critics as exploitative; Ms. Jolie responded that her quotations had been taken out of context, but the magazine stood by the article. THE FUTURE PERFECT A prizewinner at last year’s Locarno Festival, Nele Wohlatz’s debut feature blends fiction and documentary as it follows a Chinese teenager in Argentina. INDIVISIBLE Conjoined twin singers in southern Italy weigh whether to be separated. Edoardo De Angelis directed. MANOLO: THE BOY WHO MADE SHOES FOR LIZARDS Manolo Blahnik, the designer of elegant shoes for women, gets a film profile, courtesy of the fashion editor Michael Roberts , who is making his first movie. MOTHER! In Darren Aronofsky’s first feature since “Noah” — remember that? — he’s returning to the mind games of “Black Swan.” Jennifer Lawrence and Javier Bardem receive unexpected guests (Ed Harris and Michelle Pfeiffer) at their home. RAT FILM Theo Anthony’s inventive, multifaceted docu-essay draws parallels between the history of rodent extermination, which reached milestones at Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore, and the history of racism and redlining in that city. You’ll learn about the proper height of trash cans and watch desperate residents as they take rat- catching into their own hands — with fishing rods. RED TREES The London-based, Brazilian-born filmmaker Marina Willer delves into the history of her family, Jews in Prague during World War II. RYDE It was only a matter of time before the ride-sharing industry begot its own horror movie. Ryde is the movie’s version of Uber or Lyft. In this case, the driver is replaced by a psychopath. STRONG ISLAND Yance Ford takes us on a fragmented personal and nonchronological journey through his family history, pivoting on the events surrounding his brother’s shooting death at a Long Island auto shop in 1992. TIME TO DIE First shown in 1966 but never released in the United States, the Mexican director Arturo Ripstein’s debut feature, with a screenplay by Gabriel García Márquez and Carlos Fuentes, is a western: A man imprisoned for murder returns home, where the prospect of settling down is complicated, and the victim’s sons want revenge. VENGEANCE: A LOVE STORY It sounds more like “Vengeance: A ‘Death Wish’ Knock-Off.” Nicolas Cage plays a detective who goes well beyond the bounds of his authority when the rapists of a single mother (Anna Hutchison) are acquitted with the help of a smarmy lawyer (Don Johnson). WETLANDS On the outskirts of Atlantic City, a detective (Adewale Akinnuoye-Agbaje) with a fraught past tries to get his life back on track. Heather Graham and Jennifer Ehle also star. THE WILDE WEDDING Glenn Close stars as a retired actress who is no Norma Desmond : As she prepares for her fourth marriage (to Patrick Stewart, with hair), she is the center of a family gathering that includes an ex-husband (John Malkovich, without hair) and other potential sources of wackiness (Minnie Driver, Grace Van Patten, Noah Emmerich and Peter Facinelli). WOODPECKERS At a prison in Santo Domingo, Dominican Republic, an inmate (Jean Jean) begins a clandestine, sign-language-enabled courtship with a prisoner (Judith Rodriguez Perez) in the nearby women’s penitentiary. Sept. 20 THIRST STREET An American flight attendant (Lindsay Burdge) has a fling with a Frenchman (Damien Bonnard), only to have his ex-girlfriend (Esther Garrel) turn up, in the latest psychological whirlwind from Nathan Silver (“Stinking Heaven”). Mr. Silver wrote it with C. Mason Wells, a programmer at the Quad Cinema in the West Village, where the movie is opening. Sept. 21 HISSEIN HABRÉ, A CHADIAN TRAGEDY The Chadian director Mahamat-Saleh Haroun turns to documentary for a portrait of the survivors of the regime of Hissène Habré, who was president of Chad from 1982 to 1990 and who in 2016 was convicted of torture and crimes against humanity. Sept. 22 BATTLE OF THE SEXES Two experts at serving one-liners — Emma Stone and Steve Carell — turn to serving tennis balls in this light docudrama from Jonathan Dayton and Valerie Faris (“Little Miss Sunshine”). The movie recreates the 1973 exhibition match between Billie Jean King (Ms. Stone) and Bobby Riggs (Mr. Carell), which became a kind of cultural symbol in the fight for gender equality. BOBBI JENE The winner of the best documentary award at this year’s Tribeca Film Festival, Elvira Lind’s film follows the dancer Bobbi Jene Smith after she leaves the Batsheva Dance Company. BOSTON Matt Damon narrates this documentary about the history of the Boston Marathon, including the bombings in 2013. ELIZABETH BLUE Anna Schafer stars as a woman who grapples with mental illness as she prepares to marry her fiancé (Ryan Vincent). Kathleen Quinlan also stars. The writer and director, Vincent Sabella, has said he based some of the film on his own experiences living with a diagnosis of schizophrenia. THE FORCE For this documentary, the director Peter Nicks followed the Oakland Police Department in California over two years, a period that included a series of high-ranking departures in the wake of departmental scandals. GAGA: FIVE FOOT TWO That’s Lady Gaga, filmed behind the scenes over eight months. How many other 5-foot-2 Gagas do you know? HONG KONG TRILOGY: PRESCHOOLED, PREOCCUPIED, PREPOSTEROUS The cinematographer Christopher Doyle — who collaborated with Wong Kar-wai on some of that filmmaker’s most stunning movies — directs three short works that blend documentary and fiction and focus on different generations in Hong Kong at a time of transition and pro-democracy protests. THE HOUSES OCTOBER BUILT 2 This is a sequel to a 2014 found-footage horror film in which five friends visited haunted houses. THE KING’S CHOICE In 1940, King Haakon VII of Norway refused to surrender to the invading German Army. The director Erik Poppe captures him at the critical juncture of his decision. Jesper Christensen plays the king. Image Taron Egerton in the spy sequel “Kingsman: The Golden Circle.” Credit Giles Keyte/20th Century Fox KINGSMAN: THE GOLDEN CIRCLE The bespectacled superspies and their impeccably tailored suits return for a sequel to the 2015 adaptation of the comic book The Secret Service. Matthew Vaughn’s follow-up serves at least one good cause — keeping Julianne Moore employed, here as a villain — and also stars Taron Egerton, Mark Strong, Channing Tatum, Colin Firth, Halle Berry and Elton John (?!). LAST RAMPAGE The director Dwight H. Little (“Murder at 1600”) dramatizes the 1978 prison escape of two men (Robert Patrick and Chris Browning) in Arizona and the murders that followed . With Heather Graham and Bruce Davison. Image Lloyd (left, voiced by Dave Franco) in “The Lego Ninjago Movie.” Credit Warner Bros. THE LEGO NINJAGO MOVIE If you can build it with Legos, you can build a movie around it. Following “The Lego Movie” and “The Lego Batman Movie,” this latest spinoff is inspired by Lego’s current ninja-themed line. Dave Franco provides the voice of a school-age ninja who challenges his father (Justin Theroux), an evil warlord. Jackie Chan is his sensei; Fred Armisen, Abbi Jacobson, Olivia Munn and Kumail Nanjiani lend their vocal talents, too. LOVING VINCENT Armand Roulin (voiced by Douglas Booth), who sat for Vincent van Gogh, sets out to investigate why the artist committed suicide. This biopic is billed as the first animated feature to be constructed completely from oil paintings, which are done in van Gogh’s style. The voice cast also includes Chris O’Dowd and Saoirse Ronan. SHOT A sound mixer (Noah Wyle) is shot by a stray bullet; the film contrasts his medical ordeal with the actions of the penitent teenager (Jorge Lendeborg Jr.) who shot him. Sharon Leal plays the wife of Mr. Wyle’s character. STRONGER David Gordon Green, a long way from his indie roots (“George Washington,” “All the Real Girls”), dramatizes the true story of Jeff Bauman (Jake Gyllenhaal), who lost both of his legs in the Boston Marathon bombing. Tatiana Maslany stars as his love interest, and Miranda Richardson as his mother. THE TIGER HUNTER An Indian tiger hunter’s son (Danny Pudi, from “Community”), having emigrated to Chicago, puts on a charade to pretend he’s more successful than he is when the woman he loves pays a visit. This feature, Lena Khan’s first, is set in 1979. UNREST When Jennifer Brea, a Harvard doctoral student, was struck with chronic fatigue syndrome, she started a video diary that grew into this documentary. VICTORIA & ABDUL Victoria is Queen Victoria, played by — who else? — Judi Dench. Abdul (Ali Fazal) is the clerk who travels to England to furnish her with a ceremonial coin. Stephen Frears, already familiar with British royalty from “The Queen” (2006), chronicles the resulting friendship. WELCOME TO WILLITS Campers who travel to a marijuana-growing part of Northern California stumble into a town prone to visits from aliens, who are not so chill. The cast includes Dolph Lundgren, Rory Culkin and Karrueche Tran. WOODSHOCK The fashion designer sisters Kate and Laura Mulleavy wrote and directed this impressionistic debut feature, which stars Kirsten Dunst as a woman who, while grieving and undergoing an unconventional drug treatment, descends into what looks like madness. Depression onscreen is familiar territory for Ms. Dunst, who went down a similar rabbit hole in Lars von Trier’s “Melancholia.” Sept. 27 BUGS In last year’s “City of Gold,” the food critics Ruth Reichl and Jonathan Gold agreed that eating insects would ultimately be necessary for the human race to survive. In Andreas Johnsen’s documentary, the gourmands at the Nordic Food Lab in Denmark get in on the ground floor and dine with insect foodies from around the globe. CLIVE DAVIS: THE SOUNDTRACK OF OUR LIVES The music producer and Arista Records founder recounts his career and is dished about by many of the artists whose careers he influenced, including Bruce Springsteen, Aretha Franklin, Patti Smith, Barry Manilow, Alicia Keys and (presumably in archival footage) Whitney Houston. I AM ANOTHER YOU After meeting a man who is a drifter, seemingly by choice, in Florida, the Chinese documentarian Nanfu Wang (“Hooligan Sparrow”) followed him across the United States. This documentary, which showed at South by Southwest and BAMcinemaFest, explores the contradictions of his lifestyle. Sept. 29 ABUNDANT ACREAGE AVAILABLE Amy Ryan and Terry Kinney star as siblings who return to the family farm to bury their father — only to meet three brothers whose family owned the farm before them. Angus MacLachlan (who wrote the screenplay for “Junebug”) wrote and directed. AMERICAN MADE Tom Cruise already played a cocky fighter pilot in “Top Gun” and hung from a plane by his fingertips in “Mission: Impossible — Rogue Nation.” Mr. Cruise’s next feat in hotshot aviation? Starring as Barry Seal, a pilot who claimed to have made more than $50 million smuggling drugs, and ultimately served as a witness for the federal government before being killed. In this loose version of events from Mr. Cruise’s “Edge of Tomorrow” director, Doug Liman, Seal also works for the C.I.A. Domhnall Gleeson, Sarah Wright and Benito Martinez all figure into his antics. BLOOD STRIPE A sergeant (Kate Nowlin) returns home from Afghanistan and experiences psychological aftereffects. Remy Auberjonois, the son of the character actor Rene Auberjonois, directed the film, and wrote it with Ms. Nowlin, his wife. Image Ellen Page stars in a reimagining of “Flatliners.” Credit Columbia Pictures FLATLINERS Evidently none of the characters in this reimagining was cool enough to watch Joel Schumacher’s “Flatliners,” the 1990 hit that featured Julia Roberts, Kiefer Sutherland and Kevin Bacon as medical students who took turns stopping one another’s hearts. Had they watched it, they might have learned that it wasn’t a great idea. Ellen Page, Diego Luna, Nina Dobrev, Kiersey Clemons and James Norton play the new class, and Mr. Sutherland is back, but in a different role. Niels Arden Oplev (the original “The Girl With the Dragon Tattoo”) directed. HEARTSTONE It’s summer in Iceland, and while one teenage boy chases a girl, another begins to fall for that boy, his longtime best friend. Gudmundur Arnar Gudmundsson directs. JUDWAA 2 In this remake of the 1997 comedy “Judwaa,” the Bollywood heartthrob Varun Dhawan plays separated identical twins who are psychically linked — what happens to one affects the other. And then they meet. LITERALLY, RIGHT BEFORE AARON It’s Adam (Justin Long) who was, literally or figuratively, the boyfriend right before Aaron (Ryan Hansen), the man Allison (Cobie Smulders), Adam’s ex, is about to marry. To make things truly awkward, she invites Adam to the wedding. The actor Ryan Eggold wrote and directed. LUCKY No stranger to America’s wide-open spaces after his work with David Lynch, Wim Wenders and countless others, Harry Dean Stanton stars as a 90-year-old living in a desert town looking for meaning in his life. John Carroll Lynch (Arthur Leigh Allen in “Zodiac”) directed. David Lynch himself is in the cast. MARK FELT — THE MAN WHO BROUGHT DOWN THE WHITE HOUSE From the moment Bob Woodward and Carl Bernstein had the rug pulled out from under them with the revelation of Deep Throat’s identity in 2005, a biopic of the man who blew the whistle on Watergate was probably inevitable. Liam Neeson stars as their anonymous source, W. Mark Felt, the No. 2 man at the F.B.I. , who helped sink Nixon’s presidency. Peter Landesman (“Parkland,” which revolved around the John F. Kennedy assassination) directed. OUR SOULS AT NIGHT Reunited from “The Chase,” “Barefoot in the Park” and “The Electric Horseman,” Robert Redford and Jane Fonda star as widowed neighbors who grow close in this adaptation of Kent Haruf’s final novel . Ritesh Batra directed. THE PATHOLOGICAL OPTIMIST For this documentary, the director Miranda Bailey trailed Andrew Wakefield, the lead author of a widely discredited 1998 study — since retracted by the journal that published it, The Lancet — that claimed a link between vaccines and autism. He subsequently lost his medical license but became a significant figure in the anti-vaccine movement his work initiated. The film followed him for five years, beginning in 2011. PEARL JAM: LET’S PLAY TWO Fans of the Chicago Cubs eager to relive last year’s championship season would probably prioritize the nail-biter that was Game 7 . But for anyone whose favorite part was Pearl Jam, here’s a concert film that goes behind the scenes with Eddie Vedder during Pearl Jam’s performances at Wrigley Field in August 2016. A QUESTION OF FAITH A car accident links three families. Richard T. Jones, Kim Fields and C. Thomas Howell star. REALIVE The Spanish director Mateo Gil (who has collaborated with Alejandro Amenábar on scripts for films like “Open Your Eyes”) wrote and directed this science-fiction film about a man (Tom Hughes) with a terminal disease who is cryogenically frozen and then awakened in 2084 after 60 years of limbo. Charlotte Le Bon and Oona Chaplin co-star. THE SOUND Rose McGowan plays an acoustics expert who discredits rumors of the paranormal. (It’s a living.) But a “ghost station” — an abandoned subway stop — may just have her stumped. Christopher Lloyd also stars in this horror film, directed by Jenna Mattison. SUPER DARK TIMES An accidental death begins to fray at the relationship of best friends (Owen Campbell and Charlie Tahan) in upstate New York. This coming-of-age drama-thriller is set in the 1990s. October Oct. 4 CHAVELA Catherine Gund and Daresha Kyi directed this documentary portrait of Chavela Vargas , a singer known for ranchera music andpopular recordings of beloved Mexican songs. Oct. 6 ASSHOLES The title refers to two relapsed addicts who meet cute in a therapist’s waiting room. Peter Vack (an actor on “Mozart in the Jungle”) makes his feature directorial debut. BARRACUDA A Texas woman (Allison Tolman) grapples with the fallout from the arrival of her unknown half sister (Sophie Reid). BENDING THE ARC This documentary looks at the work of three advocates, including Jim Yong Kim, a doctor and the president of the World Bank, who developed strategies for combating AIDS and Ebola, among other diseases, in impoverished countries. BETTER WATCH OUT A babysitter (Olivia DeJonge) forgets to include home invaders in her hourly rate. BLADE RUNNER 2049 No, Ridley Scott hasn’t recut “Blade Runner” again. This is a sequel to his 1982 film, which wrote the rules for modern sci-fi noir. Denis Villeneuve (“Arrival”) directed, and Harrison Ford returns as Deckard. (If the movie is set 30 years after the first film, and he’s still alive, does that mean he’s not a replicant?) Ryan Gosling, as a Los Angeles police officer, is the lead. Ana de Armas, Sylvia Hoeks and Robin Wright also star. BRAWL IN CELL BLOCK 99 S. Craig Zahler, who made the excellent, underseen western “Bone Tomahawk,” directs Vince Vaughn as a former boxer who winds up in the slammer after serving as a drug courier. Don Johnson (of course) and Udo Kier (why not?) are also in the cast. Image Marsha P. Johnson in David France’s documentary “The Death and Life of Marsha P. Johnson.” Credit Netflix THE DEATH AND LIFE OF MARSHA P. JOHNSON Ms. Johnson was a drag queen and transgender activist who was present at the Stonewall riots and whose death in 1992, under suspicious circumstances, was ruled a suicide. This documentary, directed by David France (“How to Survive a Plague”), is “both a true-crime mystery and an elegy for the old West Village,” Mike Hale wrote in The New York Times when it screened at the Tribeca Film Festival. DEMENTIA 13 Sure, everything seems to be rebooted these days, but was anyone expecting a remake of the 1963 horror film “Dementia 13,” arguably Francis Ford Coppola’s first feature (discounting his apprentice work for Roger Corman and soft-core films)? Who knows — maybe Richard LeMay, who directed, will be the next Coppola. DINA Dan Sickles and Antonio Santini’s well-liked documentary follows Dina, who is on the autism spectrum, and her boyfriend, Scott, a Walmart greeter, as the two prepare to marry. The movie won the top American documentary prize at the Sundance Film Festival. EARTH: ONE AMAZING DAY Richard Dale, Peter Webber and Fan Lixin directed this sequel to the 2009 nature documentary “Earth,” which Jeannette Catsoulis described in The Times as “nature defanged and declawed for kiddie consumption.” FACES PLACES For her latest personal essay and travelogue in the vein of “The Gleaners and I,” the French new wave legend Agnès Varda has shared directing and M.C.-ing duties with the French street artist JR. Over the course of a road trip, as they reflect on French culture and camaraderie, he comes to seem like a natural successor to her sensibility. The movie garnered almost universal acclaim at the Cannes Film Festival in May. Image Willem Dafoe and Brooklynn Prince in “The Florida Project,” set on the outskirts of Disney World. Credit A24 THE FLORIDA PROJECT Sean Baker makes movies about “unseen” communities in plain sight: transgender prostitutes and cabdrivers in Los Angeles (“Tangerine”), say, or the world of pornographic filmmaking in “Starlet.” An unlikely crowd-pleaser, “The Florida Project” is centered on a seedy motel near Disney World, where Mr. Baker’s 6-year-old heroine (the exuberant Brooklynn Prince) lives jubilantly, despite poverty and squalid surroundings. THE ISLANDS AND THE WHALES The residents of the Faroe Islands, between Scotland and Iceland, find that the whales so central to their way of life have been contaminated by pollution. MAINELAND Miao Wang’s documentary trails two Chinese teenagers who move to the United States to attend private high schools in Maine. THE MOUNTAIN BETWEEN US In a big change of pace, the Palestinian filmmaker Hany Abu-Assad (“Omar,” “Paradise Now”) directs Kate Winslet and Idris Elba in a survival picture. The two play strangers who, in their desperation to get where they want to go, charter a plane that crashes in remote mountains. MY LITTLE PONY: THE MOVIE If you can hear this title without getting a theme song stuck in your head, consider yourself lucky. If you can take your kids to this without being pressed into watching the television series (or buying the toys on which it’s based), consider yourself luckier. Uzo Aduba, Emily Blunt, Kristin Chenoweth, Taye Diggs, Michael Peña and Sia provide some of the voices. OVERDRIVE Scott Eastwood — yes, there’s a familial resemblance to his famous father, Clint Eastwood — and Freddie Thorp star as ace car thieves who are blackmailed into stealing a car from the nemesis of a crime kingpin. Ana de Armas also stars in the movie, which looks like a calculated appeal to fans of “The Fast and the Furious.” PARADISE Andrei Konchalovsky (“Runaway Train”) directed this Holocaust story, shot in black and white, about a Russian woman in the French Resistance and a German officer she knows from before the war. SO B. IT Stephen Gyllenhaal, Jake and Maggie’s father, directed this adaptation of Sarah Weeks’s young-adult novel about a 12-year-old (Talitha Bateman) who goes on a journey to discover why her mother knows fewer than two dozen words. It also stars Alfre Woodard, Cloris Leachman and John Heard (in one of his last roles). SURVIVING PEACE With interviews from both sides of the conflict, this documentary proposes solutions for peace between the Israelis and the Palestinians. TAKE EVERY WAVE: THE LIFE OF LAIRD HAMILTON  Mr. Hamilton , a titan of surfing, is profiled by the documentarian Rory Kennedy (“Last Days in Vietnam”). TAKE MY NOSE … PLEASE! The journalist Joan Kron, making her first documentary, looks back at how female comedians have lifted a shroud of secrecy from the pressures on women to elect plastic surgery. TRAFFICKED This drama follows three women from three countries who are imprisoned as sex slaves in Texas. Ashley Judd, Anne Archer and Elisabeth Röhm are in the cast. UNA In a screen version of David Harrower’s play “Blackbird” — which ran Off Broadway with Jeff Daniels and Alison Pill and, a decade later, on Broadway with Mr. Daniels and Michelle Williams — Ben Mendelsohn and Rooney Mara play a middle-aged man and the woman with whom he had an illegal sexual relationship when she was a girl, who confronts him 15 years later. WALKING OUT Alex and Andrew J. Smith (“The Slaughter Rule”), chroniclers of their native Montana, direct this lean survivalist film about a father and son (Matt Bomer and Josh Wiggins) whose rare time together turns harrowing after complications on a hunting trip. Bill Pullman appears in flashbacks, and Lily Gladstone (“Certain Women”) turns up briefly. Oct. 13 78/52: HITCHCOCK’S SHOWER SCENE You might call Alexandre O. Philippe’s documentary a behind-the-scenes portrait — except that it’s more like a behind-the-scene portrait, a feature-length examination of the moment of Marion Crane’s death in “Psycho” from technical, historical and theoretical angles. You’ll learn a lot even if you know the movie well. ALEX & EVE This Australian comedy is being promoted as the antipodean “My Big Fat Greek Wedding,” except this time it’s the groom who’s Greek, and the woman he hopes to marry is a Lebanese Muslim. BREATHE Andy Serkis, perhaps tired of hiding behind special effects in the “Planet of the Apes” and “Lord of the Rings” movies, hides instead in the director’s chair. His debut feature tells the story of Robin Cavendish (Andrew Garfield), a British man who became an advocate for the disabled after polio paralyzed him. Claire Foy plays Cavendish’s wife, Diana. THE DEPARTURE Lana Wilson (a director of “After Tiller”) films a profile of Ittetsu Nemoto, an erstwhile punk rocker and Buddhist priest who offers support for the suicidal. FOR AHKEEM Documentarians trail Daje Shelton, a teenager in an impoverished section of St. Louis, through her high school years. THE FOREIGNER Jackie Chan plays a man who wants answers after his daughter is killed in a bombing. He thinks that a politician with a past in the Irish Republican Army (Pierce Brosnan, made up so that he bears a striking resemblance to Gerry Adams, president of Sinn Fein) knows who’s responsible. Martin Campbell (“Casino Royale”) directed. GNOME ALONE After moving into a new house, a girl discovers that the garden gnomes are alive — and guarding the entrance to another dimension. It sounds like something out of David Lynch, but it’s an animated feature from Peter Lepeniotis (“The Nut Job”) and Shelly Shenoy. Image Will Tilston, left, as Christopher Robin and Domhnall Gleeson as A.A. Milne in “Goodbye Christopher Robin.” Credit David Appleby/Fox Searchlight Pictures GOODBYE CHRISTOPHER ROBIN J. M. Barrie had “Finding Neverland.” Now A. A. Milne, the creator of Winnie-the-Pooh, gets a biopic that delves into the sources of inspiration for the Hundred Acre Wood. Domhnall Gleeson plays Milne; Margot Robbie portrays his wife; and Will Tilston plays his son, the real Christopher Robin. Simon Curtis (“My Week With Marilyn”) directed. HAPPY DEATH DAY In “Groundhog Day,” fate gave Bill Murray a chance to repeat a bad day and turn it into a good one. “Happy Death Day” — about a college student (Jessica Rothe) who continually relives the day she is murdered — puts a grimmer spin on that premise. HUMAN FLOW Ai Weiwei, the Chinese artist and activist, directed this two-hour-20-minute look at refugee crises and human migration in 23 countries. MARSHALL Chadwick Boseman stars as Thurgood Marshall in a biopic set more than a decade before Marshall’s landmark arguments before the Supreme Court in Brown v. Board of Education. As a lawyer in his early 30s working for the N.A.A.C.P., he defends a Connecticut chauffeur accused of rape and attempted murder . Josh Gad, Sterling K. Brown and Kate Hudson also star. Reginald Hudlin directed. Image From left, Ben Stiller, Adam Sandler and Elizabeth Marvel in “The Meyerowitz Stories (New and Selected).” Credit Atsushi Nishijima/Netflix THE MEYEROWITZ STORIES (NEW AND SELECTED) Dysfunctional families aren’t exactly new territory for Noah Baumbach, but this bittersweet and often just plain bitter comedy about three siblings (Adam Sandler, Ben Stiller and Elizabeth Marvel), healing old wounds and dealing with their cantankerous father (Dustin Hoffman), got a warm reception at Cannes in May. With Grace Van Patten and, in a bit of counterintuitive casting, Emma Thompson. MONOGAMISH After his divorce from the actress Olivia Wilde, Tao Ruspoli (a son of an Italian prince , Alessandro Ruspoli) delved into a documentary investigation of marriage and monogamy. PROFESSOR MARSTON & THE WONDER WOMEN A handful of critics complained that this summer’s “Wonder Woman” lacked the original comic’s kinkiness. For that, Angela Robinson’s biopic tells the story of Wonder Woman’s creator, a psychologist who maintained a hidden life with his wife (Rebecca Hall) and their lover (Bella Heathcote). Image Q’orianka Kilcher in “Te Ata,” a biopic of the celebrated Chickasaw performer. Credit Paladin TE ATA Q’orianka Kilcher (“The New World”) plays Mary Thompson Fisher, known as Te Ata, a Chickasaw performer whose celebrated career included appearances before Franklin D. Roosevelt. Graham Greene and Gil Birmingham also star. THY FATHER’S CHAIR Orthodox Jewish twins who have been hoarders for years are pressed by a tenant into cleaning out their home, which prompts a reckoning with their past and their future. Antonio Tibaldi and Alex Lora made this direct-cinema-style documentary. TOM OF FINLAND Pekka Strang stars as Touko Laaksonen, a Finnish advertising designer who, starting in the 1950s, had a sideline in making pornographic drawings that depicted various forms of aggrandized masculinity . He became a notable figure in the art world and in gay culture. WASTED! THE STORY OF FOOD WASTE The celebrity chef Anthony Bourdain leads this exploration of food sustainability, and of how leftover parts can be transformed into gourmet meals. Oct. 18 L’ENFANT SECRET This 1979 film by Philippe Garrel (“I Can No Longer Hear the Guitar”) will receive its first run in the United States, following a showing at the New York Film Festival and a retrospective of that French auteur’s work at the Metrograph in New York. And like many of his films, the semi-autobiographical movie charts the disintegration of a relationship. (Anne Wiazemsky and Henri de Maublanc play the couple.) LIBERATION DAY North Korea doesn’t get many visits from Slovenian industrial-rock musicians. This documentary follows what happened when the band Laibach received an invitation to perform there. THE PARIS OPERA Frederick Wiseman already went behind the scenes of the Paris Opera Ballet . Jean-Stéphane Bron filmed this in-depth examination of the broader opera company, during a period that included the November 2015 terrorist attacks in Paris. Oct. 20 BPM (BEATS PER MINUTE) Robin Campillo, a regular screenwriting collaborator of Laurent Cantet’s (“The Class”), took the Grand Prix at Cannes, the equivalent of second place, for this powerful look at AIDS activists in Paris in the early 1990s, with a focus on protests and strategy. DEALT Luke Korem directs this documentary portrait of Richard Turner, a card magician who happens to be blind. GEOSTORM The solution to global warming, as depicted in this science-fiction blockbuster bid, is to build a system of satellites that can control Earth’s weather. That sounds like a great idea — until the system goes haywire. Dean Devlin, a frequent writer and producer on Roland Emmerich’s movies (“Independence Day,” the 1998 “Godzilla”), orchestrates the mayhem. With Gerard Butler, Jim Sturgess, Abbie Cornish and Andy Garcia. JUNGLE Daniel Radcliffe and other explorers get lost in the Amazonian jungle, a bind from which no Hogwarts-style magic will save them. KILLING GUNTHER Political precedents are broken all the time, but for now, Arnold Schwarzenegger stands as the only former governor of California to star as a bespectacled, wisecracking hit man who becomes the target of other hit people. The “Saturday Night Live” veteran Taran Killam wrote and directed. He also stars, alongside Cobie Smulders and Allison Tolman. LEATHERFACE It’s odd to call the release of a prequel to “The Texas Chain Saw Massacre” a bittersweet event, but that’s the case with this origin story for Leatherface, arriving just a few months after the death of Tobe Hooper , the director of the 1974 original. NEVER HERE Mireille Enos (“The Killing”) plays an artist whose lover sees a murder. The problem is, his testimony would reveal who he is, so she pretends she was the witness. Sam Shepard (who died in July ), Goran Visnjic and Nina Arianda also star. NIGHTWORLD A former police officer moves from Los Angeles to Bulgaria, where, as a security officer, he discovers a haunted building, as one does. Image Josh Brolin leads a team of firefighters in “Only the Brave.” Credit Richard Foreman/Columbia Pictures ONLY THE BRAVE Josh Brolin stars as the leader of the Granite Mountain Hotshots — wildfire specialists called “the Seal Team 6 of firefighters” in the trailer — in a portrait of the group’s bravery, based on a GQ magazine article. Nineteen of the 20-member team died fighting a wildfire in the Southwest in 2013. Joseph Kosinski (“Tron: Legacy”) directed. ONE OF US The documentarians Heidi Ewing and Rachel Grady (“Detropia,” “Jesus Camp”) capture three years in the lives of three Hasidic New Yorkers who have left their ultra-Orthodox communities. SAME KIND OF DIFFERENT AS ME Greg Kinnear plays an art dealer who finds his life transformed by a friendship with a homeless man (Djimon Hounsou). With Renée Zellweger and Jon Voight. THE SNOWMAN Scary: A serial killer who went silent becomes active again. Possibly not as scary: The killer strikes at snowfall and leaves snowmen as calling cards. Michael Fassbender and Rebecca Ferguson investigate. Tomas Alfredson (“Tinker Tailor Soldier Spy”) directed this adaptation of a best seller by Jo Nesbo. TEMPESTAD Tatiana Huezo’s documentary tells the stories of two women in Mexico, one who was accused of human trafficking, and another whose daughter went missing. TRAGEDY GIRLS Alexandra Shipp and Brianna Hildebrand star as internet sleuths who catch the killer they’ve been investigating — then decide to continue his spree for the clicks. With Josh Hutcherson and Craig Robinson. TYLER PERRY’S BOO 2! A MADEA HALLOWEEN Tyler Perry puts on his grandma outfit yet again, but this is the first time she’s had to deal with actual Halloween monsters. WHERE’S THE MONEY To retrieve stolen money, a black student (the comedian Andrew Bachelor) at the University of Southern California rushes a very white fraternity. WONDERSTRUCK Todd Haynes’s magical adaptation of a book by Brian Selznick alternates between two timelines as it charts the parallel journeys of two children in New York. In 1927 — a strand told in the style of a black-and-white silent film — a deaf girl (Millicent Simmonds) searches for a movie star (Julianne Moore). In 1977, a boy (Oakes Fegley) who has become deaf in an electrical storm seeks his father. THE WORK A group with the goal of rehabilitating prisoners enters Folsom State Prison in California for a four-day exercise in this documentary. Oct. 25 GOD’S OWN COUNTRY Francis Lee’s drama, which drew acclaim at Sundance, concerns a farmer in Northern England who falls for a Romanian migrant worker. Josh O’Connor and Alec Secareanu star. Oct. 27 AIDA’S SECRETS Alon Schwarz’s documentary concerns the reunion of two brothers, who were separated in infancy, and their mother. ALL I SEE IS YOU Pulling a gender swap on the Val Kilmer–Mira Sorvino vehicle “At First Sight,” this film from Marc Forster (“World War Z”) casts Blake Lively as a woman who, having been blinded in her youth, regains sight in one eye, thanks to an operation. It turns out that her husband (Jason Clarke) isn’t the man of her dreams. BILL NYE: SCIENCE GUY Once the host of a slightly goofy educational children’s show, Bill Nye has become a highly visible advocate for scientific thinking for adults, particularly on evolution and global warming. David Alvarado and Jason Sussberg directed this documentary profile. BRIMSTONE & GLORY Dreams catch fire, literally, at the National Pyrotechnic Festival in Tultepec, Mexico. The celebration, its participants and the tradition of firework-making are the subjects of Viktor Jakovleski’s documentary. CRASH PAD Domhnall Gleeson discovers that the woman he’s been having an affair with (Christina Applegate) is just using him to get revenge on her husband (Thomas Haden Church). The husband gets revenge on her by moving into Mr. Gleeson’s man cave. Nina Dobrev also stars; the veteran editor Kevin Tent (who has worked with Alexander Payne) directed. THE DIVINE ORDER This Swiss comedy from Petra Volpe was a prizewinner at the Tribeca Film Festival. In a cloistered Swiss village in 1971, a housewife (Marie Leuenberger) picks up the torch for women’s liberation; the movement she starts jolts the conservative populace. FÉLICITÉ The filmmaker Alain Gomis, who will bring his first feature to the New York Film Festival this fall, directed this story of a singer (Véro Tshanda Beya Mputu) in Kinshasa, the Democratic Republic of Congo, who desperately needs money to pay for her injured son’s recovery. JIGSAW Jigsaw died long ago, it seemed, and his copycats have been quiet since “Saw 3D” in 2010. But what if — hear us out — he didn’t actually die? Or there’s another copycat? One of these things will prove true in the resurrection of a truly unkillable franchise. JOAN DIDION: THE CENTER WILL NOT HOLD The actor Griffin Dunne (“After Hours”) directed this profile of one of his aunts — who happens to be Joan Didion. She discusses contemporary life, her career and the loss of her husband and daughter. THE KILLING OF A SACRED DEER Winner of a screenwriting prize at Cannes, this warped blend of horror film and morality play from Yorgos Lanthimos (“The Lobster”) stars Colin Farrell as a cardiologist and Barry Keoghan (“Dunkirk”) as an ingratiating boy who knows something about his past. Nicole Kidman plays the wife of Mr. Farrell’s character. MAYA DARDEL Lena Olin plays an author who starts a rather ghoulish competition: After declaring on the radio that she will end her life, she invites male writers to vie to become executor of her estate. Zachary Cotler and Magdalena Zyzak wrote and directed. MR. ROOSEVELT Noël Wells (“Master of None”) wrote, directed and stars in her debut feature, playing a comedian who returns from Los Angeles to Austin, Tex., and finds that her world there has changed. NOVITIATE Maggie Betts directs this powerful film about a young woman (Margaret Qualley, from “The Leftovers”) who decides to become a nun after attending Roman Catholic school. Sort of a “Full Metal Habit,” the movie chronicles her initiation into convent life, which coincides with the Vatican II reforms. Melissa Leo plays the vindictive mother superior. Dianna Agron and Morgan Saylor also star. THE SQUARE “Force Majeure” already brought the Swedish director Ruben Ostlund international attention (especially after a YouTube video , possibly tongue-in-cheek, showed him melting down while watching the Oscar nominations). “The Square,” which won the Palme d’Or at Cannes, takes his satirical ideas about masculinity, hypocrisy and the social contract to a new level. Claes Bang plays a museum curator whose ideals don’t always match his actions. Elisabeth Moss appears as an American journalist, and the motion-capture coach Terry Notary has a memorable wordless turn. STOIC After his wife and daughter are killed, a lawyer (Antonio Banderas) steels himself for vengeance. Isaac Florentine directed. Image Julianne Moore and Matt Damon in “Suburbicon,” directed by George Clooney. Credit Paramount Pictures/Black Bear Pictures SUBURBICON The brothers Joel and Ethan Coen are among the screenwriters for this feature, set in 1959, but George Clooney, who directed, has said that the movie, contrary to appearances, is not a comedy. Matt Damon plays a father figure who gives in to darker impulses after his wife (Julianne Moore, playing sisters) is murdered in a Levittown-like suburb being convulsed by racial violence. Image Foreground, from left, Miles Teller, Beulah Koale and Joe Cole in “Thank You for Your Service.” Credit Francois Duhamel/DreamWorks and Universal Pictures THANK YOU FOR YOUR SERVICE Miles Teller plays a returning Iraq war veteran reacclimating to civilian life. With Haley Bennett and Amy Schumer. Jason Hall, the screenwriter of “American Sniper,” directed. Oct. 31 BAD BLOOD THE MOVIE Here’s a problem that Taylor Swift wouldn’t even try to solve: After an attack on a full-moon night, a college-age woman (Mary Malloy) turns into a vicious monster. The twist? She’s not a werewolf, but a were-frog. Ribbit. November Nov. 1 11/8/16 Eighteen filmmakers followed voters in 25 states on Election Day 2016. This documentary is the result. FRANK SERPICO The New York Police Department whistle-blower immortalized by Al Pacino in Sidney Lumet’s 1973 film speaks for himself in a documentary directed by Antonino D’Ambrosio. THE LIGHT OF THE MOON After a sexual assault, an architect (Stephanie Beatriz) struggles to resume her life just as it was before. Jessica M. Thompson wrote and directed. 1945 To pay tribute to the dead after the Holocaust, an Orthodox Jewish man and his son travel back to a Hungarian village, where many of the residents were collaborators. Ferenc Torok directed. Nov. 3 ALONG FOR THE RIDE When “Easy Rider” (1969) was a runaway success, Hollywood briefly believed that Dennis Hopper was a bankable director. Universal Pictures gave him a budget and the chance to make “The Last Movie” (1971), a fiasco by reputation that time has treated kindly. There has already been one documentary about its legendarily chaotic making, “The American Dreamer.” This one is based on anecdotes told to the director Nick Ebeling and covers some of Hopper’s later career as well. Image From left, Mila Kunis, Kristen Bell and Kathryn Hahn in “A Bad Moms Christmas.” Credit Hilary Bronwyn Gayle/STX Entertainment A BAD MOMS CHRISTMAS It seems like only yesterday that Mila Kunis, Kristen Bell and Kathryn Hahn were laying waste to good-mom stereotypes. They’re at it again, only this time it’s the holidays. The original writer-director team, Jon Lucas and Scott Moore, returns. BLADE OF THE IMMORTAL The immortal is probably the director, Japan’s Takashi Miike; this is said to be his 100th film. Like his “13 Assassins,” this outing is a samurai tale, albeit one based on a manga. DREAM BOAT A German documentary follows five subjects on a cruise exclusively for gay men. GILBERT If you think the comedian Gilbert Gottfried’s voice could peel paint, you’re out of luck, because this is a documentary about him. Neil Berkeley directs this portrait of his life offstage. LAST FLAG FLYING Set in 2003, the opening-night feature at this year’s New York Film Festival is said to be a riff on Hal Ashby’s “The Last Detail.” Richard Linklater directs Steve Carell, Laurence Fishburne and Bryan Cranston as old Vietnam War pals who travel together to bury Mr. Carell’s character’s son, killed in Iraq. LBJ Woody Harrelson plays Lyndon B. Johnson from roughly the time of his loss at the 1960 Democratic National Convention through the passage of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 during his unexpected presidency. Jennifer Jason Leigh plays Lady Bird Johnson. Rob Reiner directed. MOST BEAUTIFUL ISLAND The Spanish actress Ana Asensio writes, directs and stars in this thriller about an undocumented immigrant who, looking for a bit of work, becomes a pawn in a game. MY FRIEND DAHMER If you’ve ever wondered what kind of mystery meat Jeffrey Dahmer ate in the school cafeteria, here’s a film about his teenage years. It’s based on a graphic novel by Derf Backderf, who went to school with Dahmer. Ross Lynch, a singer who starred in the Disney Channel series “Austin & Ally,” undergoes an alarming image makeover to play the Milwaukee Monster before he earned that nickname. NO DRESS CODE REQUIRED A couple who run a salon in Baja California, Mexico, both men, stump for their right to marry in a documentary by Cristina Herrera Borquez. ROMAN J. ISRAEL, ESQ. Denzel Washington is the title character in this legal drama, written and directed by Dan Gilroy (“Nightcrawler”). With Colin Farrell and Carmen Ejogo. THOR: RAGNAROK Thor (Chris Hemsworth) is slinging his hammer again in theaters — or would be, if he had it in hand. Instead, he’s across the universe fighting in a gladiatorial contest against the Hulk (Mark Ruffalo). Taika Waititi (“What We Do in the Shadows”) may bring an offbeat sensibility to this Marvel tentpole. Nov. 10 BITCH A housewife who’s been taken for granted (Marianna Palka, the movie’s writer and director) takes up residence in her house’s basement and begins behaving like a most un-housebroken dog. The film is a combination of exploitation-style horror and feminist statement. DADDY’S HOME 2 When we last saw Mark Wahlberg and Will Ferrell, they had buried the hatchet and found a way to split parenting duties (Mr. Ferrell’s character being married to Linda Cardellini, who plays the mother of Mr. Wahlberg’s children). Now the pals are faced with the prospect of seeing their own dads over the holidays. Mr. Ferrell’s effusive and emotional father is played by John Lithgow, while Mr. Wahlberg’s is played by Mel Gibson. Enough said. DESTINATION UNKNOWN Twelve Holocaust survivors, including a number who have never shared their experiences before, speak in this documentary. I REMEMBER YOU A woman’s suicide, her missing son and a haunted house are all somehow connected in this Icelandic thriller directed by Oskar Thor Axelsson. IN BETWEEN Three Palestinian roommates (Mouna Hawa, Sana Jammelieh and Shaden Kanboura) navigate the contradictions of life in Tel Aviv. INTENT TO DESTROY: DEATH, DENIAL & DEPICTION The veteran documentarian Joe Berlinger (the “Paradise Lost” trilogy) chronicles the making of Terry George’s film “The Promise,” a rare large-scale production about the Armenian genocide. The documentary also explores what it frames as Turkish efforts through the years to prevent that story from being told. LADY BIRD Greta Gerwig’s first solo feature as a director is a droll comedy that draws on her own upbringing in Sacramento, with Saoirse Ronan as her movie counterpart. With Laurie Metcalf, Tracy Letts and Lucas Hedges (who gave a standout performance as Casey Affleck’s nephew in “Manchester by the Sea”). Image Kenneth Branagh, left, and Johnny Depp in “Murder on the Orient Express.” Credit Nicola Dove/20th Century Fox MURDER ON THE ORIENT EXPRESS The question hovering over this Kenneth Branagh-directed adaptation of Agatha Christie’s classic murder mystery is whether it will change the ending, which at this point is known to anyone who’s read the book, seen Sidney Lumet’s all-star 1974 movie version or just absorbed it through cultural osmosis. Mr. Branagh plays Hercule Poirot. The other celebrity train passengers include Penélope Cruz, Judi Dench, Johnny Depp and Michelle Pfeiffer. MAYHEM A virus that turns infected people into pure ids is unleashed in a law office. Steven Yeun and Samara Weaving star in Joe Lynch’s grindhouse-style feature. THE PRICE A Nigerian-American (Aml Ameen) striving for success in finance faces challenges personally and ethically. It’s the first feature from the writer-director Anthony Onah. SANTA & ANDRES It’s 1983 and Santa (Lola Amores) is assigned to supervise Andres (Eduardo Martínez), a gay writer in Cuba regarded as suspicious by the regime. Their chilly relationship soon thaws. THELMA Perhaps a return to form by the Norwegian director Joachim Trier — his last feature, the English-language “Louder Than Bombs,” met with a mixed reception from critics — “Thelma” centers on a repressed young woman (Eili Harboe) who leaves her remote hometown to study in Oslo. She begins to experience seizures and an attraction to a classmate (Kaya Wilkins). THREE BILLBOARDS OUTSIDE EBBING, MISSOURI When she suspects that a police chief (Woody Harrelson) hasn’t done enough to solve her daughter’s murder, a mother (Frances McDormand) puts that message on three billboards — ticking off a sizable portion of the town. It’s a comedy, of the bleak variety that Martin McDonagh (“In Bruges”) usually makes. With Sam Rockwell and Abbie Cornish. Nov. 15 REBELS ON POINTE A documentarian, Bobbi Jo Hart, goes backstage with the male dance troupe Les Ballets Trockadero de Monte Carlo. SONG OF GRANITE With re-enactments, black-and-white cinematography and ample music, the filmmaker Pat Collins captures the life of the Irish folk singer Joe Heaney. Nov. 17 BIG SONIA The filmmakers follow Sonia, a Holocaust survivor, as she gives speeches and goes about her daily life, which includes receiving an eviction notice at her store. THE BREADWINNER This feature from the Irish animation studio that made the Oscar-nominated “The Secret of Kells” is set in 2001 in Afghanistan, where a 12-year-old disguises herself as a boy to assume her father’s role as the earner for the family. HOLY AIR Remember the canned air in “Spaceballs”? This comedy concerns a Christian Arab in the Israeli city of Nazareth who tries to sell air from the spot where the Virgin Mary learned she would conceive. Image From left, Jason Momoa, Gal Gadot, Ezra Miller and Ray Fisher in “Justice League.” Credit Warner Bros. and DC Comics JUSTICE LEAGUE The conventional wisdom on “Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice” is that the director Zack Snyder probably pushed thebrooding-superhero template a bit too far. On the evidence of the first trailer, “Justice League” takes a more tongue-in-cheek tone. Wonder Woman (Gal Gadot) and Batman (Ben Affleck) assemble a team that includes Aquaman (Jason Momoa) and the Flash (Ezra Miller). THE LONG NIGHT OF FRANCISCO SANCTIS An Everyman (Diego Velázquez) in Argentina in 1977, when the country was ruled by a military junta, must choose to prevent a government-sanctioned kidnapping (or not). MUDBOUND Widely acclaimed at Sundance, the new film from Dee Rees (“Pariah”) is a “they don’t make ’em like they used to” Hollywood-style epic that also tells its story in a way Hollywood never did: Set in the Mississippi Delta around World War II, the movie accords equal weight to the lives of a black sharecropping family (Mary J. Blige, Rob Morgan and Jason Mitchell) and white landowners (Carey Mulligan, Jason Clarke and Garrett Hedlund). ON THE BEACH AT NIGHT ALONE To his detractors, the droll, prolific South Korean director Hong Sang-soo keeps repeating himself. (At least twice a year, it’s fair to expect a new movie about a filmmaker and his fumbling, soju-addled interactions with women.) “On the Beach at Night Alone,” one of three Hong features to have its premiere in 2017, is said to be even more private, a reflection on how the South Korean news media reacted to word of Mr. Hong’s relationship with his latest muse, Kim Min-hee, who plays an actress (of course), and who won a prize at the Berlin Film Festival for her performance in it. REVOLT Lee Pace and Berenice Marlohe play a soldier and an aid worker in Africa during an extraterrestrial invasion. This science-fiction movie looks like it’s geared for fans of “District 9.” THE STAR In this animated feature, the first Christmas is seen from the vantage points of a donkey (voiced by Steven Yeun) and other animals, who sound a lot like Keegan-Michael Key, Kelly Clarkson, Ving Rhames and Gabriel Iglesias. SWEET VIRGINIA A hit man (Christopher Abbott) and a rodeo champion (Jon Bernthal) cross paths in Alaska. It’s a noir, of course. With Imogen Poots and Rosemarie DeWitt. WONDER A boy with a facial deformity (Jacob Tremblay) must deal with the difficulty of being the new kid in school. Julia Roberts and Owen Wilson play his parents. Stephen Chbosky, the author and filmmaker of “The Perks of Being a Wallflower,” directed. Nov. 22 COCO Pixar takes inspiration from the Mexican holiday Día de los Muertos (the Day of the Dead) — a name Disney tried to trademark — for an animated outing in which a boy (Anthony Gonzalez) who aspires to be a musician discovers a world filled with skeletons and hidden secrets. Gael García Bernal and Benjamin Bratt are among the voices. DEATH WISH Credit for the crude fascination of the 1974 “Death Wish” belongs to its oddball star, Charles Bronson, who, with his mustache and sly half-smiles, never really looked like a guy prepared to turn on a dime into a violent vigilante. Bruce Willis, on the other hand, can do ice-cold. For this “reimagining,” Eli Roth (“Hostel”) directed and Joe Carnahan (“The Grey”) wrote the script, so expect an uptick in gore. DARKEST HOUR Wearing what looks like several pounds of makeup, Gary Oldman plays Winston Churchill in the immediate days following his ascension to prime minister as he faces the history-altering decision to negotiate with Nazi Germany or continue leading Britain into war. Joe Wright directed; Kristin Scott Thomas and Lily James also star. THE MAN WHO INVENTED CHRISTMAS Like “Finding Neverland” and “Goodbye Christopher Robin” (see above), “The Man Who Invented Christmas” seems predicated on the notion that most interesting underpinnings of any work of fiction are the autobiographical elements that inspired it. Did Charles Dickens (Dan Stevens) ever meet a Ghost of Christmas Past? Image Jessica Chastain in Aaron Sorkin’s directing debut, “Molly’s Game.” Credit Michael Gibson/STX Entertainment MOLLY’S GAME Can Aaron Sorkin pace his own dialogue? We’ll find out in his directorial debut, based on the true story of Molly Bloom (Jessica Chastain), who was known for arranging secret poker games for well-heeled, sometimes famous players and was named in an indictment in 2013 for her role in a gambling ring. (She was sentenced to a year’s probation .) Idris Elba, Kevin Costner and Michael Cera also star. Nov. 24 BOMBSHELL: THE HEDY LAMARR STORY Ms. Lamarr scandalized filmgoers when she skinny-dipped in Gustav Machaty’s “Ecstasy” (1933), but this documentary argues that there was a much more consequential surprise in her career: She was an unheralded inventor. As part of the fight against the Nazis, she helped devise a technological system that provided the underpinnings of Bluetooth and Wi-Fi. CALL ME BY YOUR NAME A teenager (Timothée Chalamet) in northern Italy for the summer is drawn to an American doctoral student (Armie Hammer) who arrives at the villa. Luca Guadagnino directed this adaptation of André Aciman’s novel, and the reaction at film festivals has been nothing short of rapturous. With Michael Stuhlbarg. THE CURRENT WAR Alfonso Gomez-Rejon (“Me and Earl and the Dying Girl”) directed this story of the rivalry between Thomas Edison (Benedict Cumberbatch) and George Westinghouse (Michael Shannon) to set the standard for electrical power. With Katherine Waterston, Nicholas Hoult and Tom Holland. Nov. 29 NAPLES ’44 In this ode to Naples, Norman Lewis, a British soldier who arrived in the Italian city during the Allied forces’ liberation of Italy, has his memories read by Benedict Cumberbatch. December Image Dave Franco, left, and James Franco in “The Disaster Artist,” about a notorious flop. Credit Justina Mintz/A24 Dec. 1 THE DISASTER ARTIST In the history of the medium, only a handful of movies are so incompetent that they defy all explanation. The midnight movie “The Room” certainly qualifies. One of its actors, Greg Sestero, along with Tom Bissell, wrote an account of that film’s making, and now James Franco has turn that account into a movie, casting himself as Tommy Wiseau, the fiercely independent personality who willed “The Room” into being. With Dave Franco, Seth Rogen and Ari Graynor. THE NEW RADICAL Adam Bhala Lough’s documentary focuses on two men with extreme views on the flow of information in the digital world: Cody Wilson, who invented a gun made with pieces generated from a 3-D printer and uploaded the blueprint, and Amir Taaki, Mr. Wilson’s collaborator on a project to broaden the use of Bitcoin. THE OTHER SIDE OF HOPE That’s the perfect title for a film by Aki Kaurismaki, the bleakly comic Finnish filmmaker of “Le Havre” and “The Man Without a Past.” He won best director at the Berlin Film Festival for this tale of a restaurant owner (Sakari Kuosmanen) who befriends a Syrian (Sherwan Haji) seeking asylum in Helsinki. POLAROID What “The Ring” was to VHS tapes, this movie is to Polaroid photographs. Must horror movies ruin all of our favorite obsolete technologies? TRIBES OF PALOS VERDES A young woman (Maika Monroe) new to a beach community in Southern California looks to surfing as an escape from her fractured family life. Based on the novel by Joy Nicholson, the movie also stars Jennifer Garner and Alicia Silverstone. WONDER WHEEL If it’s a year that ends in a number, there must be a new Woody Allen movie. His latest, which closes the New York Film Festival on Oct. 15, revolves around a family living in Coney Island in the 1950s. With Kate Winslet, Jim Belushi, Juno Temple and Justin Timberlake. Dec. 6 BILL FRISELL: A PORTRAIT Emma Franz’s documentary delves into the guitarist’s career and process. Bonnie Raitt and Paul Simon are among the other musicians who appear. Dec. 8 ALL THE MONEY IN THE WORLD Ridley Scott directs a thriller inspired by the real-life abduction of 16-year-old J. Paul Getty III , whose wealthy but stingy grandfather dragged his feet on paying the ransom, not wanting to create an incentive for the kidnapping of his other grandchildren. Charlie Plummer plays the teenager, Kevin Spacey his grandfather and Michelle Williams his mother. HOLLOW IN THE LAND Dianna Agron plays a woman who believes her brother, who has vanished, is innocent of murder, despite clues pointing to his guilt. FILM STARS DON’T DIE IN LIVERPOOL Annette Bening channels Gloria Grahame, the glamorous, scandalous star of “In a Lonely Place,” in her twilight years in England (after the collapse of her marriage to her former stepson, Tony Ray). It’s based on a memoir by Peter Turner, who is played by Jamie Bell. Paul McGuigan directed. Image Sally Hawkins in “The Shape of Water,” directed by Guillermo del Toro. Credit Kerry Hayes/Fox Searchlight Pictures THE SHAPE OF WATER Guillermo del Toro specializes in creepy-crawlies, and this tale of a mute lab worker (Sally Hawkins) who befriends an aquatic creature looks to have fabulous production values. Octavia Spencer, Michael Shannon and Richard Jenkins also star. VILLA CAPRI Whatever happened to Ron Shelton, the longtime maker of hit sports comedies (“Bull Durham,” “White Men Can’t Jump”)? In his first theatrical feature since 2003, he directs Morgan Freeman as a Palm Springs resort manager who joins forces with a tenant (Tommy Lee Jones). With Rene Russo and Glenne Headly, who died in June. Dec. 13 MISS KIET’S CHILDREN Petra Lataster-Czisch and Peter Lataster take their cameras into the classroom of a Dutch teacher who educates refugees. Dec. 15 THE BALLAD OF LEFTY BROWN Jared Moshé directs this old-school western, about a sidekick (Bill Pullman) on the trail of the men who killed his partner (Peter Fonda). FERDINAND “The Story of Ferdinand,” the 1936 children’s book by Munro Leaf about a gentle bull who “liked to sit just quietly and smell the flowers,” charges onto the screen in an animated feature from Carlos Saldanha (the “Ice Age” movies). John Cena lends his voice to Ferdinand; the other vocal talent includes Kate McKinnon, Gina Rodriguez and Daveed Diggs. Image Kelly Preston and John Travolta in the biopic “Gotti.” Credit Lionsgate Premiere GOTTI John Gotti, the crime boss and “first media don,” was already the focus of a 1996 TV movie, in which he was played by Armand Assante. In this theatrical film, which covers 30 years, John Travolta assumes impersonation duties, as he did for Robert Shapiro. Mr. Travolta’s wife, Kelly Preston, plays Gotti’s. The screenwriters are Lem Dobbs (“The Limey”) and the character actor Leo Rossi; directed by Kevin Connolly of “Entourage” fame. PERMANENT That’s “permanent” as in the hair style, which apparently goes awry in this coming-of-age comedy. It stars Kira McLean, Patricia Arquette and Rainn Wilson. STAR WARS: THE LAST JEDI “Last” is not a word in the “Star Wars” vocabulary, especially in an age when — as with Peter Cushing in 2016’s stand-alone episode, “Rogue One” — the actors no longer need to be alive to perform in the movie. When we left Rey (Daisy Ridley) in “The Force Awakens,” she was dangling a light saber at Luke Skywalker (Mark Hamill). Rian Johnson (“Looper”) directed this installment, employing a record-low number of wipe transitions. Dec. 20 Image From left, Nick Jonas, Dwayne Johnson, Karen Gillan, Jack Black and Kevin Hart in “Jumanji: Welcome to the Jungle.” Credit Columbia Pictures JUMANJI: WELCOME TO THE JUNGLE “Jumanji” is rebooted in an unusually literal sense: Four teenagers cleaning out their school’s basement discover not a board game but a video game that sucks them in to a jungle adventure. And in that world, they aren’t teenagers but avatars, played by Dwayne Johnson, Kevin Hart, Karen Gillan and Jack Black. Jake Kasdan directed. Dec. 22 BRIGHT The “Suicide Squad” director David Ayer’s movie is set in a fantastical mishmash of Los Angeles. Will Smith and Joel Edgerton play buddy cops — one human (Mr. Smith) and one orc (Mr. Edgerton). Their discovery of a magic wand leads them into an adventure. With Noomi Rapace, Lucy Fry and Edgar Ramírez. DOWNSIZING Alexander Payne (working with his frequent screenwriting partner Jim Taylor) directs a parable for cash-strapped times. A couple (Matt Damon and Kristen Wiig) learn that they can live large on the money they have — if they have themselves miniaturized. With Christoph Waltz, Jason Sudeikis, Neil Patrick Harris and Hong Chau. HAPPY END Michael Haneke returns to several of his favorite themes — voyeurism, hypocrisy, the moral emptiness of the bourgeoisie and the loneliness of death — in a movie that, understandably, struck many critics at Cannes as a retread. Jean-Louis Trintignant (from Mr. Haneke’s “Amour”) is the head of a rich, venal family; Isabelle Huppert, a Haneke regular, is in the cast as well. PITCH PERFECT 3 Now out of college, the Bellas reunite to perform their exuberant brand of a cappella at a U.S.O. show. Anna Kendrick, Rebel Wilson, Brittany Snow and Hailee Steinfeld all return. Trish Sie (the not-bad “Step Up All In” ) directed. THE POST The Washington Post already had its Watergate movie ; must it hog the Pentagon Papers as well? Steven Spielberg pops into The Post’s newsroom to watch the paper’s publisher Katharine Graham (Meryl Streep) and executive editor Ben Bradlee (Tom Hanks) as they decide whether to report on classified documents that revealed a secret history of the Vietnam War. The Times broke the story ; The Post joined in five days following the initial publication after a federal judge ordered The Times to halt . In New York Times Co. v. United States, the Supreme Court concluded that both papers had a right to publish. With Alison Brie, Carrie Coon and many others. Dec. 25 Image Hugh Jackman as P.T. Barnum in “The Greatest Showman.” Credit Niko Tavernise/20th Century Fox THE GREATEST SHOWMAN Well, this is a novelty act — or at least might have been before the success of “La La Land”: a modern, straight-to-screen musical, based on the rise of P. T. Barnum (Hugh Jackman). Let’s hope it wasn’t guided by the principle that “there’s a sucker born every minute” (a quote often attributed to Barnum). Michelle Williams, Zac Efron and Zendaya also star. Michael Gracey, who has worked in visual effects and commercials, directed this debut feature. The songs are by Benj Pasek and Justin Paul, who collaborated on “La La Land.” UNTITLED PAUL THOMAS ANDERSON FILM Relatively little is known about Paul Thomas Anderson’s first feature since “Inherent Vice” (2014), except that it reunites him with Daniel Day-Lewis — unforgettable in “There Will Be Blood” — and that it centers on a dressmaker who tailors for the crème de la crème of London in the 1950s. More listings for the new season: Art | Classical | Dance | Pop | Television | Theater Compiled with the assistance of Suzanne O’Connor. Correction :  A movie entry in the New Season listings last Sunday misstated the length of “Human Flow,” a film by Ai Weiwei. It is 2 hours 20 minutes, not nearly three. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page AR 72 of the New York edition with the headline: Toys, Manolos and Tennis Champs . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Related Coverage The Fate of ‘The Last Jedi’ Is in His Hands Sept. 6, 2017 Image Kate Winslet Relives Two Haunting Film Experiences Sept. 6, 2017 Image The 25 Best Films of the 21st Century So Far. June 9, 2017 Image Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              