   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Politics Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by CPAC Official Says Michael Steele Was Chosen to Lead G.O.P. Because He’s ‘a Black Guy’ Image Michael Steele in Pasadena, Calif., last year. He was the first black chairman of the Republican National Committee, serving from 2009 to 2011. Credit Colin Young-Wolff/Invision, via Associated Press By  Jeffery C. Mays Feb. 25, 2018 Michael Steele, a former chairman of the Republican National Committee, said on Saturday that the party has a problem with racism after a spokesman for a conservative group said Mr. Steele was chosen as chairman because he is “a black guy.” The spokesman, Ian B. Walters, made the comment on Friday night at a dinner in Oxon Hill, Md., that was part of the annual Conservative Political Action Conference. “We elected Mike Steele to be the R.N.C. chair because he’s a black guy,” said Mr. Walters, the communications director for the American Conservative Union, which organized the conference. “That was the wrong thing to do.” There were audible gasps when Mr. Walters made the comment, Jonathan Levine, the media editor at The Wrap , who was at the dinner, said on Twitter. Mr. Steele was the first black chairman of the Republican National Committee, serving from 2009 to 2011. His tenure coincided with the election of Barack Obama as the first black president. Mr. Walters said Republicans were “somewhat lost” after the election of Mr. Obama and “weren’t sure what to do,” leading to Mr. Steele’s selection as chairman. Speaking with Joy-Ann Reid of MSNBC on Friday night, Mr. Steele, a former lieutenant governor of Maryland and the first black person elected to statewide office there, said he did not accept an apology from Mr. Walters. “He said at one point, ‘I apologize,’ Mr. Steele said, adding that he told Mr. Walters, “That’s not enough.” Mr. Walters apologized on Twitter on Friday night. “I spoke with Mike Steele and apologized because the words I used do not capture my heart,” he wrote. He added : “Sometimes when you speak, the words that come out do not reflect what’s intended. Many of us were critics of how Chairman Steele performed at the R.N.C. He is a good man, and he did his best.” In a phone interview on Saturday morning on Ms. Reid’s show, Mr. Steele was asked if the Republican Party had a problem with racism. “Yes, they do. And I think we need to be honest and acknowledge it,” Mr. Steele said. “The fact that people sit here now and say this has nothing to do with race — yeah, it does, when you stand on a podium and blatantly speak to race the way Ian did.” Mr. Walters did not respond to a request for comment on Saturday. Michael Ahrens, a spokesman for the Republican National Committee, said in a statement, “We reject the offensive comments made” on Friday night. Black people made up 2 percent of registered Republican voters in 2016, according to the Pew Research Center , the same percentage as in 1992. President Trump received 8 percent of the black vote in 2016. Mr. Steele, speaking Saturday on his show on SiriusXM radio with Matt Schlapp, the chairman of the American Conservative Union, said comments like Mr. Miller’s “undermine” efforts to “expand this party and its reach into communities of color across the country.” Mr. Schlapp apologized to Mr. Steele and said Mr. Walters’s comments were “unfortunate words” that might have been based on Mr. Steele’s criticism of the “Trump phenomena.” Mr. Steele has been critical of Mr. Trump’s racially tinged comments about Haiti and some African nations . Mr. Steele also said that Mr. Trump’s suggestion that armed teachers would help prevent school shootings was “desperate and delusional.” On Saturday, Mr. Schlapp urged Mr. Steele “to have some grace,” which angered the host. “Wait a minute,” Mr. Steele said. “What the hell do I have to be graceful for?” He added: “It is stupid to sit there and say we elected a black man chairman of the party and that was a mistake. Do you know how that sounds to the black community? Do you know how that sounds to Americans?” Related Coverage In Trump’s Remarks, Black Churches See a Nation Backsliding Jan. 14, 2018 Image Republicans Choose First Black Party Chairman Jan. 30, 2009 Image 15 Claims From Donald Trump’s Speech to Conservatives, Fact Checked Feb. 24, 2018 Image As Conservatives Gather, Anger at the News Media Runs Deep Feb. 22, 2018 Image Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              