   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Opinion Supported by What Does Your Party Want? By  Thomas B. Edsall Jan. 5, 2017 Image Credit Sam Hodgson for The New York Times How do Republicans hold on to the voters Donald Trump brought to the party? Securing the loyalty of the millions of white working-class Americans who lined up behind Trump will require that all three wings of the Republican Party — its business faction, its ideological purists and its cultural traditionalists — abandon any idea of strict adherence to core conservative principles on fiscal and social policy. “Just as Reagan converted the G.O.P. into a conservative party, with his victory this year, Trump has converted the G.O.P. into a populist, America First party,” Stephen Moore, a Trump adviser whose résumé includes stints at the Heritage Foundation and The Wall Street Journal, told Republican House members on Nov. 23. “The G.O.P. is now officially a Trump working-class party.” Moore is one of the most outspoken advocates of sweeping change, explicitly willing, in the face of a voter uprising, to jettison his own past convictions. In a subsequent National Review article, he made this quite clear : Trade and immigration are in my view unambiguously good for the country — but new policies on these issues will have to be done in ways that are supported by the American people, not shoved down their throats by the elites. In this regard, I am a populist. The elites in both parties have not understood Trumpism and have often been contemptuous of the intellect and lifestyle of the Trump loyalists. Moore is not alone. “Accommodating these new voters’ concerns will be an ongoing challenge, but the political payoffs are immense,” Henry Olsen , a senior fellow at the conservative Ethics and Policy Center, wrote. “Bringing them into the Republican fold ... will make the Midwest a new red firewall.” The surge of whites from Midwest industrial states — or more broadly from the heartland — to the Trump campaign included many voters who were not naturally inclined to the pre-2016 Republican Party. Olsen writes: These voters have shunned Republicans because they disagree with the party’s focus on low taxes, small government, and pro-business policies. They benefit enormously from middle-class entitlement programs; their children get what they consider to be good educations from public schools and state universities. They have no problem with redistribution so long as it is focused on either people who can’t work or people who do. In other words, these voters have little or no interest in the anti-government stance that had become reflexive among many congressional Republicans. Accommodation now requires fiscal, business and social conservatives to compromise their beliefs in ways that will be wrenching, if not intolerable, to some. Olsen’s assessment: These voters view questions of public taxation and spending differently than do other factions in the party. Where movement conservatives see many social programs and the high taxes that fund them as threats to liberty, these voters see them as giving decent, hard-working people a hand up to live decent, dignified lives. Where business conservatives see free trade or immigration as helping people and increasing growth, these voters see those policies as favoring foreigners over themselves and as just another way that their bosses try to pay them less without justification. In the case of cultural litmus test issues, Olsen argues, newly recruited white working-class converts to Trump’s Republican Party do not consider conservative dogma on gay rights, abortion, gender identity, or traditional marriage their priority. Stephen Bannon, appointed senior counselor and chief strategist to President Trump, puts much of what Moore and Olsen say in colorful and perhaps more illuminating language. In a Nov. 15 interview with The Hollywood Reporter , Bannon described the goal of the “entirely new political movement” he believes Trump is leading: It’s everything related to jobs. The conservatives are going to go crazy. I’m the guy pushing a trillion-dollar infrastructure plan. With negative interest rates throughout the world, it’s the greatest opportunity to rebuild everything. Shipyards, ironworks, get them all jacked up. We’re just going to throw it up against the wall and see if it sticks. It will be as exciting as the 1930s, greater than the Reagan revolution — conservatives, plus populists, in an economic nationalist movement. Bannon is explicit in his identification of the enemy: The globalists gutted the American working class and created a middle class in Asia. The issue now is about Americans looking to not get f—ed over. If we deliver, we’ll get 60 percent of the white vote, and 40 percent of the black and Hispanic vote and we’ll govern for 50 years. Bannon’s worldview was evident in the Trump campaign’s closing argument , a striking two-minute commercial that mixed images of closed factories, multiracial workers, piles of hundred dollar bills, shots of Hillary and the Clinton Foundation, Trump rallies, busy Chinese assembly line workers and footage of George Soros, Janet Yellen, and Lloyd Blankfein — all of whom are Jewish. . Trump provided the voice-over, which was taken from a speech he gave in West Palm Beach in October: For those who control the levers of power in Washington and for the global special interests, they partner with these people that don’t have your good in mind. The political establishment that is trying to stop us is the same group responsible for our disastrous trade deals, massive illegal immigration and economic and foreign policies that have bled our country dry. The political establishment has brought about the destruction of our factories and our jobs as they flee to Mexico, China and other countries all around the world. It’s a global power structure that is responsible for the economic decisions that have robbed our working class, stripped our country of its wealth and put that money into the pockets of a handful of large corporations and political entities. The only thing that can stop this corrupt machine is you. The only force strong enough to save our country is us. This ad was part and parcel of an election that has put some of the most vocal House Republicans, including the vaunted Freedom Caucus , on notice that defying Trump’s right-populist orientation could put their political future at risk. Since its formation in Jan. 2015, the caucus, a group of roughly 35 Republicans with ties to the Tea Party movement, has repeatedly blocked efforts by Republican leaders to produce compromise legislation that could win Democratic support. The group was largely responsible for the forced resignation of former Speaker John Boehner. “Trump dominated — in the primary and general elections — those districts represented by Congress’s most conservative members,” Tim Alberta wrote in National Review (he is now at Politico): They once believed they were elected to advance a narrowly ideological agenda, but Trump’s success has given them reason to question that belief. Among these archconservatives, who in the past had been fanatical in their pursuit of ideological purity, the realization that they can no longer depend on unfailing support from their constituents has provoked deep anxiety. As Alberta put it: Even if they support Trump nine times of ten, voting against him once could trigger a tweetstorm or the threat of a visit to their district. It’s a chilling thought for members who know that the Republican National Committee, the National Republican Congressional Committee, and the House GOP leadership already want them gone. Kevin McCarthy, the House majority leader, plans to make full use of Trump’s leverage to keep recalcitrant members of the Freedom Caucus in line. In a Nov. 29 interview at the Washington Post, McCarthy noted that the caucus had been a thorn in the side of House leaders, but now “there’s less ability for the Freedom Caucus to do those types of things” — blocking leadership bills, for example, especially those measures that have Trump’s backing. McCarthy pointed out that “Trump probably did the best” in the districts of caucus members, and it would be hard for them to stand up if President-Elect Trump is asking for this fundamental change, and they’re saying no to it. Various initiatives outlined by Moore, Olsen and Bannon could easily die on the vine; nevertheless, the open debate among Republican operatives and advisers stands in contrast to the Democrats’ tortured struggle to address those aspects of identity politics — race, immigration, gender and sexuality, for example — lurking beneath the large scale defection of white voters . The incendiary nature of identity issues has prompted the two leading candidates for the chairmanship of the Democratic National Committee, Tom Perez and Keith Ellison, to purposefully focus on anodyne concerns. “Our universal message of access to economic opportunity resonates with the ironworker in northeastern Ohio and the immigrant in South Florida,” Perez told the Huffington Post, referring to two states Clinton lost. “We sometimes have a relationship deficit with our voters, because we’re not communicating that message.” Ellison, in turn, matched Perez for blandness in a prepared statement on Dec. 7: At this point, the Democratic Party must be the party that delivers for working people. We can do that by meeting folks where they are, looking them in the eye, treating them with respect, and working to solve their problems. In a postelection analysis on Dec. 5, Stanley Greenberg, a Democratic pollster, and Page Gardner, president of the Women’s Voices Women Vote Action Fund , were cautious when they referred to identity politics in the Clinton campaign: Instead of spending the final weeks of the campaign advancing a compelling economic message to show Clinton would bring change, the campaign closed with a promise to fight for opportunity and to unite a multicultural America under the banner of being ‘“stronger together.” For the left coalition, the tangled issues of race, gender, immigration and identity are inescapable. Crime as an issue is similarly divisive. Over the weekend, for instance, Garry McCarthy, the former Chicago police superintendent appointed by Rahm Emanuel in 2011, breached Democratic norms and made national headlines when he blamed Black Lives Matter for a rise in violent crime. In a radio interview, McCarthy showcased the kind of potentially explosive material that could split the Democratic Party: What’s happening, and this is ironic, is that a movement with the goal of saving black lives at this point is getting black lives taken, because 80 percent of our murder victims here in Chicago are male blacks. McCarthy also pointed out that, “less than half of 1 percent of all the shootings in this city involve police officers shooting civilians.” Nor did McCarthy stop there. He contended that the Trump election quite frankly is a reaction to that. I think the people are tired of career politicians who’ve never really had a job telling us how we should think and how we should act. In late November such liberal icons as Bernie Sanders and President Obama cautiously broached the subject of identity politics. On Nov. 20, Sanders told a group in Boston: It’s not good enough for someone to say, “I’m a woman! Vote for me!” No, that’s not good enough. What we need is a woman who has the guts to stand up to Wall Street, to the insurance companies, to the drug companies, to the fossil fuel industry. That same day, Obama addressed reporters traveling with him in Lima, Peru: One message I do have for Democrats is that a strategy that’s just microtargeting particular, discrete groups in a Democratic coalition sometimes will win you elections, but it’s not going to win you the broad mandate that you need. In a centrist challenge to Nancy Pelosi, the Democratic House Leader, Tim Ryan, an Ohio congressman who presented himself as a champion of the “ flyover states ,” argued against campaign strategies in which we try to slice the electorate up. And we try to say, ‘You’re black, you’re brown, you’re gay, you’re straight, you’re a woman, you’re a man.’ The reality of it is there’s no juice in that kind of campaign. Alarm bells went off. Ian Millhiser, an editor at the liberal website Think Progress, turned to Twitter on Nov. 20 to accuse Ryan of sexism: This thing where an obscure male backbencher thinks he deserves to replace the most accomplished woman in Congress is how sexism works. Then in December, Bobby Rush , a black congressman from Chicago, told the Boston Globe that if Democrats shift their primary focus to the “white middle and working class” and take “for granted the black working class or the black underclass, the party will add an arm and lose a body.” Rush warned: If I see my party not considering, even more intensely than they’ve done in the past, the economic, social, and political climate of the people I represent, the people I’ve been fighting for all my life, then I’m going to raise hell. A Vox.com postelection headline, “ The whole Democratic Party is now a smoking pile of rubble ,” contains more than a grain of truth. At the moment, the Democratic Party is structurally fragile and its members have shied away from the kind of radical upheaval Republicans have been forced to embrace. Nonetheless, Democrats will soon face enormously risky decisions. Does the party move left, as a choice of Keith Ellison for D.N.C. chairman would suggest? Does it wait for internecine conflict to emerge among Republicans as Trump and his allies fulfill campaign promises — repealing Obamacare, enacting tax reform and deporting millions of undocumented aliens? Or should the party edge toward the center, attempting a strategic reposition on thorny issues of race, immigration, gender and identity, in effect acknowledging pressures from the right — the very pressures that delivered crucial white votes to Trump? Democrats face a vast unknown — unable to stand still and unable to make reasoned choices until they know to what lengths, demonic or inspired, Trump might go.  Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter (@NYTopinion) , and sign up for the Opinion Today newsletter . Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              