   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Politics Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Democrats Aghast at Comey’s Firing, Despite Anger Toward Him Image Senate Minority Leader Chuck Schumer, right, and House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi on Capitol Hill last week. Credit Eric Thayer for The New York Times By  Nicholas Fandos May 10, 2017 WASHINGTON — What outraged Democrats about James B. Comey last year — namely, his decision to disclose the conclusions of an F.B.I. investigation into Hillary Clinton’s private email server and then revisit it days before the presidential election — now pales in comparison to their aghast fury at his firing this week. To President Trump, they are “phony hypocrites.” But Democrats drew a clear distinction between their intense criticism of Mr. Comey’s handling of the investigation into whether Mrs. Clinton had mishandled classified emails, and his abrupt firing as he was overseeing another criminal investigation — one into possible collusion between Mr. Trump’s advisers and the Russian government during the presidential election. In a barrage of Twitter posts on Wednesday, Mr. Trump said Democrats only “PRETEND to be aggrieved” over his dismissal of Mr. Comey. As evidence, the president singled out a statement by Senator Chuck Schumer of New York, the Democratic leader, who declared in November that he had lost confidence in Mr. Comey. Mr. Trump also posted a compilation of video clips featuring prominent Democrats criticizing Mr. Comey and even urging his resignation. Dems have been complaining for months & months about Dir. Comey. Now that he has been fired they PRETEND to be aggrieved. Phony hypocrites! — Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) May 10, 2017  Perhaps as much as anything, this is a sign of just how complicated a role Mr. Comey has come to play in American politics. It was Mr. Trump, after all, who praised him in the campaign’s final days for his “guts” in pursuing Mrs. Clinton, whose loss Democrats pinned in part on Mr. Comey’s public statements about the F.B.I. investigation. Yet on Tuesday, Mr. Trump said those same decisions had cost Mr. Comey his job. Below are the statements of several prominent Democrats as the drama at, and surrounding, the F.B.I. has played out. Chuck Schumer Nov. 2: After the F.B.I. said, 11 days before the election, that it was reviewing newly discovered emails that might have been related to the investigation into Mrs. Clinton, Mr. Schumer told Bloomberg News that Mr. Comey’s decision to send lawmakers a letter informing them of the matter was “appalling.” “I do not have confidence in him any longer,” he said. Now: “I told the president, ‘Mr. President, with all due respect, you are making a big mistake,’” Mr. Schumer said during a news conference on Tuesday night. “The first question the administration has to answer is, why now?” Nancy Pelosi July: Representative Nancy Pelosi, the House Democratic leader, praised Mr. Comey as “a man of integrity and honesty,” as she defended the credibility of the F.B.I.’s investigation into Mrs. Clinton when it first drew to a close last summer. “His finger is on the pulse of this,” she said. “Nothing happens without him, and I think he’s going to be the definitive person to make the determination or the recommendation.” Nov. 2: Ms. Pelosi said in an interview with CNN that Mr. Comey had “made a mistake” by disclosing that the F.B.I. was reviewing additional emails, adding, “Maybe he’s not in the right job.” When pressed on whether he should resign, she demurred. “I think that we have to just get through this election and just see what the casualties are along the way,” she said. Now: “The president’s sudden and brazen firing of the F.B.I. director raises the ghosts of some of the worst executive branch abuses,” Ms. Pelosi said in a statement . “We cannot stand by and watch a cover-up of the possible collusion with a hostile foreign power to undermine American democracy.” Team Clinton July: As Mr. Comey testified on his decision to close the email investigation, Mrs. Clinton’s campaign sought to publicize his credentials. January to March: After Mr. Trump’s unexpected victory over Mrs. Clinton, her allies blamed Mr. Comey for speaking publicly about the investigation just before Election Day. Leading up to Mr. Trump’s inauguration, Brian Fallon, a spokesman for Mrs. Clinton’s campaign, wrote on Twitter that Mr. Comey’s actions had squandered the F.B.I.’s “reputation for independence.” Robby Mook, Mrs. Clinton’s campaign manager, said Mr. Comey’s credibility was “gone.” Now: Mr. Fallon and Mr. Mook said that, their criticisms of Mr. Comey aside, his firing during the Russia investigation was significant cause for concern. Dianne Feinstein July: “The email review process was repeatedly distorted by Republicans for political gain with little care for the facts,” Senator Dianne Feinstein, Democrat of California, said in a statement after Mr. Comey’s announcement that he was closing the Clinton case. “So I’m especially grateful to the F.B.I. and Director Comey — who previously served as a U.S. attorney and deputy attorney general during the Bush administration — for a thorough, objective review.” Nov. 6: “Today’s letter makes Director Comey’s actions nine days ago even more troubling,” Ms. Feinstein said in a statement after the F.B.I. conceded that the matter was closed. “There’s no doubt that it created a false impression about the nature of the agency’s inquiry.” Now: “The real question we face today is whether Director Comey was fired because of the Clinton email investigation — which could have happened in January — or whether he was fired because of the F.B.I.’s investigation of Trump connections to Russia,” Ms. Feinstein, who is now the top Democrat on the Judiciary Committee, said in a statement . “If Director Comey was fired to stifle the F.B.I.’s Russia investigation — and the timing of this action makes that a real possibility — that simply can’t be allowed to happen,” she said.  Get politics and Washington news updates via Facebook , Twitter and in the Morning Briefing newsletter . Related Coverage Days Before Firing, Comey Asked for More Resources for Russia Inquiry May 10, 2017 Image Inside the F.B.I., Stunned Agents Wonder About Future of Russia Inquiry May 10, 2017 Image Fact Check: The White House’s Justifications for Firing Comey May 10, 2017 Image Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              