   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Television Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Review: Tainted Water, Bad Science and 8,000 Children Exposed to Lead Image A water treatment plant in Flint, Mich. Credit Caitlin Saks/WGBH By  Mike Hale May 30, 2017 The resolution of the Flint, Mich., water crisis might seem like an unqualified victory for science at a time when its value is under attack. While politicians and bureaucrats denied that there was anything dangerous about the city’s discolored, foul-smelling tap water, independent testing proved that people were being exposed to toxic levels of lead. Scientific sleuthing led to indictments and a program to replace some of Flint’s antiquated water-delivery system. But the story isn’t that simple, as the documentarian Llewellyn Smith demonstrates in “ Poisoned Water ,” an installment of PBS’s “Nova” on Wednesday. Science was wielded on both sides of the battle. And one of the main reasons that the fight dragged on so long — and an estimated 8,000 children under the age of 6 were exposed to potentially brain-altering levels of lead — was that the government deployed shoddy, fraudulent science to rebut the claims of activists. Live by the data, die by the data. Among the government bodies that obfuscated and delayed was the Environmental Protection Agency, another factor that makes “Poisoned Water” feel timely, with the Trump administration’s proposing to cut the agency’s budget by more than 30 percent . If this was how a regional office of the E.P.A. performed under a sympathetic Democratic administration, what do we have to look forward to the next time a city’s pipes start to corrode? The story of Flint’s water is complicated, from both the scientific and narrative standpoints, and “Poisoned Water,” in the one-hour running time of “Nova,” has to move through it quickly and lightly. It’s not the most inventive or visually interesting documentary — there’s a lot of B-roll of streetscape and skyline, and a lot of scare shots of bottles of brown water. (Mr. Smith holds off on one of the story’s most ubiquitous images, the “Citizen Kane” shot of pallets of bottled water receding into the distance, until near the end of the program.) But it’s a good, straightforward primer for those who didn’t really grasp the specifics of a story that played out fitfully over several years, starting in 2014, and didn’t receive concentrated national attention until it was nearly over. In his limited time, Mr. Smith finds room for informative digressions on the biology of lead poisoning, the history of water delivery and the 2001-10 contamination of the Washington, D.C., water system that presaged the Flint disaster. Despite all the complicating factors, what happened in Flint hinged on one simple decision: the failure to put chemicals in the water that would control the corrosion of pipes. Mr. Smith shows how correcting that lapse took a concerted, lengthy effort by a chain of previously unacquainted activists — a civilian gadfly, an E.P.A. whistle-blower, a concerned university professor — that seems almost miraculous in retrospect. In the end, “Poisoned Water” is less a story of science or politics than of everyday heroism. Poisoned Water Wednesday on PBS  A version of this article appears in print on , on Page C 2 of the New York edition with the headline: A Battle Over Water, Simple Yet Complicated . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Related Coverage Michigan Allots $87 Million to Replace Flint’s Tainted Water Pipes March 27, 2017 Image Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              