   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Television Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Stephen Colbert Cracks North Korea Jokes on the Fly Image Stephen Colbert and his team came up with punchlines on short notice as news broke Thursday that North Korea’s leader, Kim Jong-un, had proposed a meeting with President Trump. Credit Comedy Central By  Sopan Deb March 9, 2018 Welcome to Best of Late Night, a rundown of the previous night’s highlights that lets you sleep — and lets us get paid to watch comedy. If you’re interested in hearing from The Times regularly about great TV, sign up for our Watching newsletter and get recommendations straight to your inbox. Late-Breaking Comedy The news that Kim Jong-un had extended an official invitation to President Trump appeared to break right as several of the late-night comedy shows were taping, forcing them to handle it on the fly. Stephen Colbert told his audience about it in an unplanned segment after the post-monologue commercial break. THIS JUST IN: Trump gets an offer from North Korea that he can't refuse. #LSSC  pic.twitter.com/MS9KLAtdqD — The Late Show (@colbertlateshow) March 9, 2018  “This can only mean one thing. Dennis Rodman is going to get the Nobel Peace Prize,” Colbert said. His team was deft in coming up with punchlines on short notice. (And Colbert’s warning that “I’m not entirely sure what I’m about to say” may have indicated that, impressively, he came up with the jokes on the spot.) He had a few more lines up his sleeve, including: “Because North Korea is an economically starved country, the invitation is B-Y-O-Everything.” “They’ve gone from ‘We’ll blow up Guam!’ to ‘We pinkie swear not to blow up Guam for a few days.’” “We’ll finally figure out who has a bigger button.” Punchiest Punchlines ( Women’s Day Edition) “Trump is thinking of making it a national holiday. Not because he supports women: because he wants another day off.” — JIMMY FALLON “KFC replaced its iconic Colonel Sanders logo with his wife, Claudia.” — JIMMY FALLON “President Trump is flying to California next week for the first time since he took office. When asked if he’ll visit LAX, he said, ‘I’ll visit my L.A. ex, my San Diego ex, my San Francisco ex. I have lots of exes all over the West Coast.” — JIMMY FALLON “So the North Korean leader extended an olive branch to Donald Trump, which is a big deal because olive branches are really the only thing they have to eat there.” — JIMMY KIMMEL “By May? He’s not still going to be president by May. This needs to happen by Wednesday. Imagine Kim Jong-un meeting Donald Trump. The two worst haircuts in the world together.” — JIMMY KIMMEL “There’s an attempt to silence porn star Stormy Daniels by President Trump’s lawyer. Yeah. Yeah, it’s kind of sad that, in that sentence, the most degrading job mentioned was President Trump’s lawyer.” — CONAN O’BRIEN “President Trump is planning a meeting about violence with the heads of the video game industry. Yeah. However, some people worry that it’s just a trap so that Trump can deport the Mario brothers.” — CONAN O’BRIEN “In the Northeast, one million people are without power because of a blizzard. Yeah. And in Wisconsin, one million people are without power because of gerrymandering. That one was just for The New York Times.” — CONAN O’BRIEN (Thank you, Conan. We’ve got you.) Black Mamba Talks Oscars The greatest sidekick in N.B.A. history, Kobe Bryant, sat down with Jimmy Kimmel to discuss winning an Oscar. His film, “Dear Basketball,” won last weekend for best animated short. “I’m still tripping about it,” Bryant told Kimmel. Kimmel asked him what he didn’t get to say in his acceptance speech. “There’s a greater sense of responsibility,” Bryant said. “How do I provide more opportunities for even more diverse and new voices to be heard in this industry? In the animation business, there’s a serious lack of diversity.” Confronting Kim Davis in Kentucky Josh Sharp and Aaron Jackson, two correspondents for “The Opposition With Jordan Klepper,” did a field segment in Kentucky profiling David Ermold, who is running to replace Kim Davis, the county clerk who rejected Ermold’s marriage license. it was an eyebrow-raising segment. Near the end, Sharp and Jackson confronted Davis at her office to mockingly warn her about her opponent. Jackson said, “Did you know there’s qualified candidates running against you in the upcoming election?” Sharp followed with, “And he doesn’t even want to use religion to take away people’s rights.” Meyers Takes ‘Closer Look’ at  Mueller Probe In Friday night’s “A Closer Look” segment, Seth Meyers did a deep dive into the recent spate of stories regarding the special counsel Robert Mueller’s investigation into Russian interference in the 2016 presidential election. But first, Meyers snuck in a Stormy Daniels barb. “The president of the United States got a restraining order against a porn star, which means we have to say goodbye to the old lowest point in American history,” Meyers said. Meyers then summarized reports that Mueller has obtained evidence that Erik Prince, the founder of the contracting company Blackwater, had met with an ally of the Russian president, Vladimir Putin, in an effort to establish a backchannel to the Kremlin early last year. “Wait. You’re telling me a secret meeting on a remote island in the Indian Ocean between a mercenary and an agent of the Kremlin turned out to be suspicious?” Meyers quipped. Also, Check This Out Image Lionel Richie is one of the three judges on the ABC reboot of “American Idol.” He said he wanted to talk to the hopefuls “about the reality of what it takes to be an artist.” Credit Ryan Pfluger for The New York Times Enjoy the weekend, everybody. And while you do that, take a gander at this profile of Lionel Richie , who will be a judge on the coming season of “American Idol.” Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              