   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Opinion Supported by Donald Trump’s Political Stew By  Thomas B. Edsall March 9, 2017 Image People protesting on the first day of the Democratic National Convention, in Philadelphia. Credit Mark Makela for The New York Times Reader, guess when this paragraph was written: Liberalism has turned away from the common people and become institutionalized into an establishment. Its spokesmen are driven around in limousines and supported by rich foundations, the television networks and publishing houses, the knowledge industry, the billion‐dollar universities and the urban consulting firms which profiteer from poverty. Liberalism is dominant only in the Northeast, which is always the last bastion of a dying order of privilege. The Northeast resists the populist surge of our day just as it fought the revolution of Jefferson, Jackson, Bryan and Roosevelt. These words appeared in The New York Times Magazine in May, 1970. The quote comes from Kevin Phillips, the originator of Richard Nixon’s election-winning Southern strategy . In fact, the problems that plagued the Democratic Party 50 years ago continue to do so. The 2016 election and its aftermath have produced turmoil on the right while once again forcing into public view worrisome long-term trends in the Democratic electorate. On Feb. 27, The Conversation , an academic website, published “ The Democratic Party is Facing a Demographic Crisis ,” by Musa al-Gharbi, a Lazarsfeld fellow in sociology at Columbia. Al-Gharbi challenges a widespread Democratic assumption (succinctly articulated in a recent book by Ruy Teixeira, “ The Optimistic Leftist ”) that guided the two Obama campaigns as well as Hillary Clinton’s 2016 bid. From that vantage point, the party is the beneficiary of demographic destiny: A swelling population of single women, knowledge workers, minorities and millennials guarantees the emergence of a majority left coalition. Instead of a “ Rising American Electorate ,” al-Gharbi describes a party on a steady downward trajectory over the last three presidential elections. “In 2008, Barack Obama beat John McCain by 192 Electoral College votes and 8.54 million popular votes,” al-Gharbi writes: In 2012, he beat Mitt Romney by just 126 electoral votes and 3.48 million popular votes. Obama’s margin of victory, while objectively comfortable, represented a 59 percent decline in the size of his popular vote lead. In 2016, Hillary Clinton won the popular vote by 2.87 million votes . Even if she had won the presidency, her performance would have marked another steep decline in Democrats’ margin of victory, down a whopping 66 percent from 2008. It would have been the narrowest popular vote margin of any winning candidate since the 2000 election . Based on his examination of exit poll data, al-Gharbi points out that Contrary to the emerging Democratic majority thesis, there does not seem to be any demographic category with which Democrats are progressively improving. His conclusion: Progressives don’t have any kind of “lock” on the future. In the near term, absent radical change, the situation may even grow worse for them. One of the mainstays of Democratic optimism is the conviction that a growing body of young voters — more liberal than their elders — will soon dominate elections, just as the baby boomers did before them. In point of fact, however, millennials are slowly, incrementally becoming a less reliable Democratic constituency. Ronald Brownstein, writing in the Atlantic , found “there’s no guarantee Democrats can reap big benefits from millennial mistrust of Trump.” As Brownstein notes: While Trump faces grim numbers among Millennials overall, he has displayed strength among them with the same groups that responded to him most in older generations: evangelical, non-urban, and blue-collar whites. Clinton did less well than Obama in 2012 among millennial voters, winning them by 19 points compared to Obama’s 23-point margin. But just as importantly, Brownstein shows that Clinton’s best margins among millennials were concentrated in reliably blue states like California, New York and New Jersey, where victory was assured. Her weakness was most evident in key battleground states where she was critically injured by defections among these same young voters. In the Rust belt, Clinton’s margin among 18- to 29-year-old voters fell far behind Obama’s, as the accompanying chart shows, with devastating effect. Image Trump supporters at a rally in Johnstown, Penn., in October. Credit Damon Winter/The New York Times In the Rust belt, millennials are disproportionately white non-college voters and their defections from the Democratic Party parallel those of their elders. In political terms, class, education and culture outweigh every other determinant, including age. Developments on the Republican side of the aisle are more straightforward. Pat Buchanan, a two-time candidate for the presidency (in 1992 and 1996), has been an outspoken critic of the Republican elite for a long time. He voices unadulterated pleasure over the recent ideological upheaval within the Republican Party. “The Republican establishment today bends the knee to Caesar,” Buchanan declared in a March 3 essay titled “ It’s Trump’s Party, Now ,” before adding: In leading Republicans away from globalism to economic nationalism, Trump is not writing a new gospel. He is leading a lost party away from a modernist heresy — back to the Old-Time Religion. Polling supports Buchanan. Not only have Republicans turned against free trade since Trump began campaigning, but a December 3-5 Economist/YouGov poll found that these same voters have lost faith in the fairness of the free market as a whole. Asked if they agreed with the statement “The free market has been sorting the economy out and America is losing,” Republicans agreed by better than two to one, 57-23, while Democrats were split, 33-33. The abrupt and often radical changes within the two parties are not just a problem for Democrats and Republicans. They are also a problem for social scientists who are struggling to make sense of the changed electorate. David Brady, a political scientist at Stanford, put the dilemma in blunt terms. In an email he wrote: Why did Kankakee, Illinois and Green Bay vote Obama and then Trump? They didn’t become racist and misogynistic over the last 8 years. It has to do with the effects of slow growth economies over time on people’s psyches. They begin to give up hope and are tired of Republicans and Democrats promising all things — Reagan “lower taxes more money’ to Obama’s ‘change, change” — and their lives don’t get better and their kids’ lives get worse. We as a profession had better start thinking more creatively about how to get at these issues instead of the old “left is good, right is bad. ” I asked Brady to elaborate on his thinking: Political science sees things as Democrats good, Republicans bad. The folks who went from Obama to Trump over 2008-2016 aren’t authoritarians, racists and evil. They have some legitimate complaints that haven’t been addressed by the Democratic Party as it stands today. As long as political science thinks of this election as all about race and misogyny and nothing else, we will miss the boat. Three of Brady’s fellow political analysts — Edward G. Carmines and Michael J. Ensley, political scientists at Indiana and Kent State universities, along with Michael W. Wagner, a professor of journalism at the University of Wisconsin-Madison — are taking up this challenge. In “ Ideological Heterogeneity and the Rise of Donald Trump ,” Carmines, Ensley and Wagner make the case that in addition to the classic division of the electorate into three categories — liberal, moderate and conservative — at least two more are needed, populist and libertarian, and perhaps a sixth, nationalist: Trump’s support among Republican primary voters, and probably in the broader electorate, only makes sense once we recognize that the political choices offered by a conservative Republican Party and a liberal Democratic Party do not reflect the full extent of the ideological heterogeneity found in the American public. The three argue that by strategic design or dumb luck, the Trump candidacy was able to activate a segment of the electorate that has historically not been part of the GOP electoral coalition. These voters, white populists, are citizens with “heterodox policy preferences,” those “who have liberal positions on economic issues and conservative preferences on social issues.” They cut across the traditional left-right divide. These voters stand out in two important ways. First, they hold what the authors call stronger “nationalist” views, which helps explain their attraction to Trump. These views include the belief that immigration takes jobs, opposition to outsourcing, support for torture and the belief that “blacks have too much influence.” The three conclude that the ability of the Republicans to mobilize and keep a grip on these voters is a crucial question looking toward future elections: Trump’s message may have appealed to populists in a way that could have fundamentally altered the electorate in states where white populists reside – states like Wisconsin, Pennsylvania and Michigan. We look forward to finding out. There are those who see the developments in the American electorate in more evolutionary, less abrupt, terms. Gary Jacobson, a political scientist at the University of California-San Diego, for example, wrote in an email: As for Trump reshaping the Republican electorate, it’s more a matter of continuing trends that go back to the 1960s (remember Nixon’s “hard hats,” the white working class “Reagan Democrats”?). As Democrats have become the party of younger, secular, urban, minority, highly educated voters, Republicans have become the party of lower educated whites, religious, conservatives, xenophobes, etc. Larry Sabato , a political scientist at the University of Virginia, wrote in an email: Trump reshaped the Republican electorate in 2016, but his performance will determine whether this was a one-shot reshuffling or something more lasting. The key constituency, Sabato said, is the “slice of non-college-educated white blue-collar workers from cities and older suburbs” who are the “ Obama-Trump voters .” In 2016, 209 of the 676 counties that cast majorities for Obama in both 2008 and 2012 backed Trump, many in the Midwest. Sabato noted that it was these voters who “put Trump over the top in Michigan and possibly Wisconsin and Pennsylvania.” “Those ex-Obama supporters?” Sabato asked: If Trump produces, they’ll reward him with a second term. If he doesn’t — and he needs to create lots of high-paying jobs in the face of automation and a global economy moving in other directions — then they’ll be ripe for a return to their former home, the Democratic Party — if Democrats give them an appealing nominee. Alan Abramowitz, a political scientist at Emory, emphasized to me that white working-class voters have been trending Republican for a long time and white voters with college degrees or post-college education have been trending Democratic as well. These developments, according to Abramowitz, reflect an ideological divide over cultural issues and racial issues that has been there for many years. What Trump has done, I think, is put more weight on the racial issues than we have seen before. Abramowitz emphasizes a key point: Republican voters are much more conservative on racial issues than in the past while Democratic voters are more liberal on those issues than in the past. In fact, Trump’s impact on voting patterns was not to increase the share of the white vote won by the Republican presidential candidate. Both Trump and Mitt Romney carried whites by the same 20-point margin. The big shift Trump wrought was to change the type of whites who voted Republican. From 1948, when American National Election Studies began polling, to 1964, college-educated voters were decisively Republican and those with high school degrees or less were reliably Democratic. In 1960, for example, voters with high school degrees or less voted 54-46 for John F. Kennedy while those with college and postgraduate degrees voted 62-38 for Richard Nixon. Beginning in 1968, when Southern whites and some working class whites in the North began to abandon the Democratic Party, Republican candidates made major inroads among non-college voters. Nixon won voters with high school degrees with 52 and 67 percent in 1968 and 1972; Ronald Reagan won them with 55 and 58 percent in 1980 and 1984. As a result, from 1980 to 1992, whites with and without college degrees generally cast similar margins for Republican presidential candidates. The pattern of white college and non-college voting is shown in the accompanying chart, which relies on data from the Pew Research Center . Starting in the 2000 election between George W. Bush and Al Gore, non-college whites became substantially more Republican in their presidential voting than whites with degrees. By 2012, Mitt Romney won whites with degrees by 14 points and those without degrees by 25 points. In 2016, however, Trump won college-educated whites by four points and non-college whites by a record-setting 39 points, a larger margin than Ronald Reagan, the previous record-holder at 29 points. Put another way, insofar as Trump voters define the contemporary Republican electorate, non-college whites are the majority, 55.1 percent, with college -educated whites becoming the minority at 44.9 percent. The Republican Party, then, has moved closer toward the goal Kevin Phillips outlined 47 years ago: I wish we could drop into the Potomac all those obsolescent conservatives who are still preoccupied with Alger Hiss and General MacArthur, and who keep trotting out laissez faire economics and other dead horses. They make the Republican party look musty to millions of ignored working‐class people who are looking for a party that relates to their needs. Trump has oriented the party toward heightened anger , intensified racial resentment , animosity to immigrants and opposition to trade . This is an exceptionally volatile mix. Trump is fanning rather than quelling the flames — everything he has done so far has been to raise, not lower, the heat. The next question is whether the Republican Party will be able to continue to exploit this mix or whether it will boil over in ways that cannot be predicted.  Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter (@NYTopinion) , and sign up for the Opinion Today newsletter . Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              