   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Politics Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Obama Chooses Merrick Garland for Supreme Court Video The president, in nominating Merrick B. Garland to the Supreme Court on Wednesday, described the appeals court judge as “one of America’s sharpest legal minds.” Published On March 16, 2016 Credit Image by Doug Mills/The New York Times By  Michael D. Shear , Julie Hirschfeld Davis and Gardiner Harris March 16, 2016 WASHINGTON — President Obama on Wednesday nominated Merrick B. Garland to be the nation’s 113th Supreme Court justice, choosing a centrist appellate judge who could reshape the court for a generation and become the face of a bitter election-year confirmation struggle. In selecting Judge Garland, 63, a well-known figure in Washington legal circles who has drawn praise from members of both parties, Mr. Obama dared Republican senators to ignore public pressure and make good on their promise to block consideration of any nominee until after the next president is chosen. The nomination to fill the seat on the court created by the death of Justice Antonin Scalia sets in motion a standoff that is likely to play out for many months, perhaps without resolution. Its outcome could tip the ideological balance of the nation’s highest court, and an array of well-financed interest groups on both sides has already assembled for the battle over the nomination. “I’ve selected a nominee who is widely recognized not only as one of America’s sharpest legal minds, but someone who brings to his work a spirit of decency, modesty, integrity, even-handedness, and excellence,” Mr. Obama said in a formal Rose Garden ceremony announcing his selection, where the president was flanked by Judge Garland and Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. “Presidents do not stop working in the final year of their term; neither should a senator.” Republicans quickly rejected Mr. Obama’s challenge. Senator Mitch McConnell of Kentucky, the majority leader, appeared on the Senate floor shortly after the president’s remarks to declare an end to Judge Garland’s nomination, no matter his qualifications. In case there was any doubt, Mr. McConnell later called Judge Garland personally to say he would not be receiving him in his Capitol office, nor taking any action on his nomination. “The American people may well elect a president who decides to nominate Judge Garland for Senate consideration,” Mr. McConnell said on the Senate floor. “The next president may also nominate someone very different. Either way, our view is this: Give the people a voice in the filling of this vacancy.” In choosing Judge Garland, a former prosecutor who has served on the Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit since 1997 and as its chief judge since 2013, Mr. Obama opted to select a jurist better known for his meticulous work ethic and adherence to legal principles than for an ideological bent. Video President Obama’s Supreme Court nominee spoke at the White House on Wednesday. Published On March 16, 2016 Credit Image by Stephen Crowley/The New York Times “At a time when our politics are so polarized, at a time when norms and customs of political rhetoric and courtesy and comity are so often treated like they’re disposable, this is precisely the time when we should play it straight,” Mr. Obama told an audience that included Judge Garland’s family, Democratic senators and liberal activists. White House officials considered, and rejected, advice from supporters who urged Mr. Obama to pressure Republicans by nominating a member of a racial minority. They also declined to zero in on a liberal champion who might have excited the core Democratic supporters that Hillary Clinton or Bernie Sanders would need in the general election. Some liberals expressed dismay with that decision. Charles Chamberlain, executive director of Democracy in America, said it was “deeply disappointing that President Obama failed to use this opportunity to add the voice of another progressive woman of color to the Supreme Court, and instead put forward a nominee seemingly designed to appease intransigent Republicans.” But White House officials said that Mr. Obama and his aides made the calculation that focusing on finding a nominee with impeccable legal credentials would expose the Republican opposition as based solely on politics. The president passed over two other federal appellate judges on his short list who might have achieved those goals: Sri Srinivasan, 49, of Indian descent, and Paul Watford, 48, an African-American who is viewed as more liberal than Judge Garland. Why Obama Nominated Merrick Garland for the Supreme Court Merrick B. Garland is a candidate who had support from Republicans in the past but would still move the court in a progressive direction. March 16, 2016 “To suggest that someone as qualified and respected as Merrick Garland doesn’t even deserve a hearing, let alone an up-or-down vote, to join an institution as important as our Supreme Court, when two-thirds of Americans believe otherwise — that would be unprecedented,” the president said. Mr. Obama had twice considered Judge Garland for the Supreme Court during his first term, and some aides viewed him at the time as an “in-case-of-emergency-break-glass” candidate whom they should save for a future vacancy where they needed a nominee who was broadly acceptable to Republicans. That future appears to have arrived. A few Senate Republicans have suggested recently that if Mrs. Clinton is elected in November, they might be more open to considering Judge Garland as an alternative to a more liberal nominee. And as Judge Garland prepared to begin meeting with senators on Thursday, there was early evidence that at least some Republican senators were softening their stances. A White House statement said that Senator Charles E. Grassley, Republican of Iowa, the chairman of the Judiciary Committee, had agreed to meet with Judge Garland, but that the meeting would be scheduled after the two-week congressional recess ended. Senators Mark Kirk of Illinois and Kelly Ayotte of New Hampshire, both facing steep re-election challenges in Democratic-leaning states, said they would meet with Judge Garland. Video Mitch McConnell, the Senate majority leader, said he stood by his original position of withholding consideration of any nominee the president puts forward. Published On March 16, 2016 Senators Susan M. Collins and Jeff Flake of Arizona, both Republicans, have also said they would sit down with Mr. Obama’s nominee. And Senator Orrin G. Hatch, Republican of Utah and a member of the Judiciary Committee, said he would be open to holding hearings on Judge Garland during a lame-duck congressional session after the election. The White House reached out to Judge Garland, along with a number of other potential nominees, days after Justice Scalia’s death on Feb. 13. Mr. Obama interviewed him last Thursday even as the president’s short list, which included his name and those of Judges Srinivasan and Watford, leaked in the news media, alarming the West Wing officials who were trying to keep the process out of the spotlight. Mr. Obama spent Friday and Saturday in Texas, attending the South by Southwest festival and Democratic fund-raisers before playing a round of golf. He returned to Washington late Saturday night and informed his top aides soon afterward that Judge Garland would be his pick. Denis McDonough, the president’s chief of staff, was one of only about a half-dozen top aides who knew the choice as planning for the public rollout of the nominee kicked into gear. Much of the work could be prepared without knowing the specific nominee, but on Tuesday night, White House videographers recorded Judge Garland for the gauzy biographical video that they released Wednesday morning. Scalia’s Supreme Court Seat Has Been Vacant For More Than 400 Days Since 1900, the Senate has voted on eight Supreme Court nominees during an election year. Six were confirmed. Feb. 15, 2016 It came out just after Mr. Obama appeared under a sunny sky at the Rose Garden to introduce Judge Garland and urge Republicans to give him a chance. “I simply ask Republicans in the Senate to give him a fair hearing, and then an up-or-down vote,” Mr. Obama said. “If you don’t, then it will not only be an abdication of the Senate’s constitutional duty, it will indicate a process for nominating and confirming judges that is beyond repair.” Judge Garland’s professional life was shaped in part by the bombing of the Alfred P. Murrah Federal Building in Oklahoma City in 1995, which killed 168 people. As a Justice Department official in the Clinton administration, he coordinated the government’s response, starting the case against the two men charged, Timothy J. McVeigh and Terry Nichols, and eventually supervising their prosecution. Mr. McVeigh was executed. Judge Garland insisted on going to the scene even as bodies were being pulled from the rubble, friends said. His role captivated Mr. Obama, said Valerie Jarrett, the president’s senior adviser, who added that it “struck the president because it reflects on the chief judge’s character.” Video The New York Times reporter Adam Liptak discusses the nomination of Merrick B. Garland and why Republicans might block him. Published On March 16, 2016 In his brief remarks, Judge Garland emotionally described his career as a prosecutor and a judge, saying that “fidelity to the Constitution and the law have been the cornerstone of my professional life.” He said that if the Senate confirmed him, he promised to “continue on that course.” The scene captured an extraordinary moment of uncertainty for Judge Garland, twice passed over for the Supreme Court and now facing a path to confirmation that is, at best, ambiguous — and could be a dead end entirely. Senator Amy Klobuchar, Democrat of Minnesota and a member of the Judiciary panel who attended the ceremony, said that may have helped move Judge Garland to the verge of tears during his comments. “This is about how this burden of standing up for an independent judiciary — even if you may never get confirmed — is so important in this incredibly polarized time,” Ms. Klobuchar said in an interview. She said many Republicans who had opposed Mr. Obama’s earlier, successfully confirmed Supreme Court nominees, Elena Kagan and Sonia Sotomayor, had told her during those proceedings that they would have supported the president if he had selected Judge Garland instead. “It’s kind of hard to get away from the fact that he, in the past and now, has been viewed as a consensus person,” she added. Adam Liptak contributed reporting.  Follow The New York Times’s politics and Washington coverage on Facebook and Twitter , and sign up for the First Draft politics newsletter . A version of this article appears in print on , on Page A 1 of the New York edition with the headline: Obama Pick Engages Supreme Court Battle . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Related Coverage Supreme Court Showdown Could Shape Fall Elections March 16, 2016 Image Allies Say Obama’s Court Pick Is Near, and Will Be Hard for Republicans to Ignore March 14, 2016 Image Supreme Court Nomination Drives Groups From Left and Right to Fight March 16, 2016 Image Show All Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              