   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Politics Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Hillary Clinton Is Stoic at Her Rival’s Inauguration Image Hillary Clinton watched as President Trump arrived at the inaugural luncheon in Statuary Hall in the Capitol on Friday. Credit Al Drago/The New York Times By  Amy Chozick Jan. 20, 2017 WASHINGTON — This was not the inauguration Hillary Clinton thought she would be attending. Some Democrats, still bitter about her election night defeat, grumbled privately that she should have skipped Donald J. Trump’s swearing-in, as 60 House Democrats did on Friday. But a groundswell of supporters praised her fortitude. There she was, in the bookend of a political career that spanned from first lady to senator to secretary of state, watching as her former Republican opponent was inaugurated as the 45th president. Mrs. Clinton was not required to accompany former President Bill Clinton and other former presidents and dignitaries to the ceremony. But after taking a deep breath backstage, she strode on stage with a practiced smile, wearing a Ralph Lauren coat and pants, all in white, a tribute to the suffragists that she had similarly made at times during her presidential campaign. She greeted allies and adversaries, embraced former first ladies, got a thumbs up from former President George W. Bush, and exchanged a warm hello with her old boss, President Barack Obama, all while appearing impervious to the scattered chants of “Lock her up!” coming from the crowd. Image Mrs. Clinton with former Presidents Bill Clinton and George W. Bush and Laura Bush at the inaugural ceremony on Friday. At one point during the day, Mr. Bush gave Mrs. Clinton a thumbs-up. Credit Doug Mills/The New York Times Mrs. Clinton’s resolve to attend the event drew admiration from some who know her. “It speaks to the depth of her character, her patriotism and her broader faith that often got lost in the campaign and was so often undernoticed,” said Christine C. Quinn, a former New York City Council speaker and mayoral candidate in town for the Women’s March on Saturday. On Friday morning, Mrs. Clinton wrote on Twitter: “I’m here today to honor our democracy & its enduring values. I will never stop believing in our country & its values.” Mr. Trump and Mrs. Clinton did not shake hands at the swearing-in, but after the inauguration, the Clintons attended a luncheon in the Capitol, where the new president said he was “very, very honored” that the former first couple was there and asked them to stand for a round of applause. The Clintons, who sat at a well-positioned table with Mr. Trump’s daughter Tiffany, and others close to the new president, rose from their seats with tight grins. “There’s nothing more I can say because I have a lot of respect for those two people, so thank you all for being here,” Mr. Trump said. Aside from the occasional appearance at a Broadway show or walk in the woods around her home in Chappaqua, N.Y., Mrs. Clinton has kept a low profile since her election loss in November. As her husband and daughter, Chelsea Clinton, dive into their efforts at the Clinton Foundation, Mrs. Clinton has given no signal about what she will do next. “She’s just not there yet,” said a friend who talked to her recently. Asked how she’s doing, Mrs. Clinton has told friends that she is “surviving,” said several people who have spoken with her but would describe the content of the private conversations only on the condition of anonymity. Mrs. Clinton has pointed to the decision by the F.B.I. director, James B. Comey , to release a letter related to her private email server days before the election and to the Russian government’s cyberattacks on Democratic targets as the reasons for her defeat. In December, at an event in Manhattan to thank her top donors, Mrs. Clinton said the hacking attacks carried out by Russia were intended “to undermine our democracy” and were ordered by President Vladimir V. Putin “because he has a personal beef against me.” Just as her candidacy divided many women, Mrs. Clinton’s attendance at the inauguration prompted mixed reactions. To some, her presence was a reminder of the missteps of Mrs. Clinton’s campaign in a race that many Democrats considered hers to lose. Half a dozen elected officials who campaigned aggressively for Mrs. Clinton declined to comment when asked about her attendance on Friday. Image Former President Bill Clinton and Hillary Clinton, the 2016 Democratic presidential nominee, attended an inaugural luncheon. Credit Al Drago/The New York Times On Thursday, the Woman’s March on Washington, expected to draw roughly 200,000 women, put out a list of over two dozen honorees , including Shirley Chisholm, Gloria Steinem and Malala Yousafzai. One name not included: Hillary Clinton. “Even for women who were die-hard supporters, they want to know when she’s gonna decide not to attend the inauguration of a man who disrespected her and millions of women across the country,” said a post on social media by Linda Sarsour , an activist and a co-chairwoman of the Women’s March who supported Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont in the Democratic primary. The decision not to honor Mrs. Clinton, who is not expected to attend the march, spurred a backlash. Supporters noted that the event’s official rallying cry, “women’s rights are human rights,” originated with Mrs. Clinton’s 1995 speech at the United Nations Fourth World Congress in Beijing. Other major moments in Mrs. Clinton’s career were marked not by her own forceful declarations, but rather by her ability to withstand painful public humiliations and defeats. “Everyone would have understood if she stayed home,” said Jennifer Palmieri, a former senior campaign aide to Mrs. Clinton. “But that’s not how she’s built.”  Follow The New York Times’s politics and Washington coverage on Facebook and Twitter , and sign up for the First Draft politics newsletter . A version of this article appears in print on , on Page A 18 of the New York edition with the headline: Clinton Watches Rival Become the President . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Related Coverage In Inaugural Address, Trump Continues to Shun Establishment Jan. 20, 2017 Image Donald Trump Is Sworn In as President, Capping His Swift Ascent Jan. 20, 2017 Image Inauguration Protesters and Police Clash on Washington’s Streets Jan. 20, 2017 Image Show All Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              