   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Strange Days How Abnormal Was Comey’s Firing? Experts Weigh In By  Quoctrung Bui , Claire Cain Miller and Kevin Quealy May 10, 2017 President Trump’s firing of the F.B.I. director, James B. Comey, was both highly unusual for a president and highly consequential, according to a panel of governance experts surveyed by The Upshot. To help put Mr. Comey’s dismissal into context, we asked the panel to rate its normality and its importance, as we did about events during President Trump’s first month and first 100 days . The consensus is that the dismissal was the most significant action so far in this presidency, and among the most abnormal. The closest event to this one in aggregate was Mr. Comey’s investigation into whether the Trump campaign colluded with Russia to influence the presidential election. Removing Mr. Comey was highly unusual, though not without precedent, the experts said. F.B.I. directors generally serve 10-year terms, but President Bill Clinton fired William S. Sessions in 1993 because of ethical lapses. However, Mr. Comey’s firing was more unusual and important because he was overseeing the Russia investigation, they said. Questions about what will happen with that investigation now that he is gone are the main reason they said his firing is likely to be highly significant, with long-term ramifications for policy and government. F.B.I. directors’ 10-year terms are in place “precisely to avoid undermining the directors’ independence in investigating high officials,” said Erica Chenoweth, a professor of international studies at the University of Denver. Timur Kuran, a professor of political science and economics at Duke, said: “It is extremely unusual for a U.S. president to interfere with an investigation involving his own behaviors. It puts at risk checks and balances that are vital to the health of U.S. democracy.” It could also distort American policy making, he said, because of potential power struggles over the investigation between parties or between Congress and the White House, or if Mr. Trump does things to try to shift the nation’s focus. We surveyed 10 experts across the ideological spectrum who have served in government or studied the way governments work. We asked them: Was the event normal, like the veto of a bill in a prior administration? Or was it highly unusual in contemporary American democracy, like ordering newspapers to suspend publication of the Pentagon Papers? Also, was it unimportant, with limited or no consequences for federal policy, like the menu for a state dinner? Or was it important, creating lasting and significant changes in policy, like the establishment of Social Security? Of 49 headline-grabbing events during the Trump administration, the panelists have said most were at least somewhat important, with about half normal and half abnormal. Other events they have said were also highly important and abnormal — though none as important as Mr. Comey’s firing — were the administration’s use of terms like “alternative facts” and “fake news”; its continued attacks on news organizations; Mr. Trump’s false accusation that President Obama wiretapped him; the White House’s decision to give its staff members secret waivers to its own conflict-of-interest rules; and the F.B.I.’s Russia investigation. The wiretapping claim was the most abnormal event to date, they said. A couple of experts noted that Mr. Trump had authority to fire Mr. Comey. Saikrishna Prakash, a professor of law at the University of Virginia, said it was no surprise, but what made it unusual was that he waited so long. “The decision is somewhat unusual because Trump could have ousted Comey at the outset and failed to do so, in the face of much evidence that the F.B.I. needed new leadership,” he said. Thomas Nichols, a professor at the U.S. Naval War College, also said it was only moderately abnormal, but that the way Mr. Trump chose to do it was unusual. “It’s within the president’s powers, and given how many times people in both parties called for Comey to be fired, hard for people to act surprised that it finally happened,” he said. “Amazingly, the administration managed to look suspicious doing it anyway.” Most of the experts found it much more significant and abnormal. Jennifer Hochschild, chairwoman of the department of government at Harvard, called it “deeply alarming.” Frances Lee, a professor of government and politics at the University of Maryland, said, “There’s no parallel.” Many of the experts said the action raised concerns about checks and balances in American democracy, involving the Russia investigation and more broadly. Tom Ginsburg, a professor of comparative and international law at the University of Chicago, said even if the investigation continued, the move could undermine the results. “Given the fact that the F.B.I. was actively engaged in an investigation of the president’s campaign contacts with foreign powers, firing the director undermines the credibility of any pro-Trump results,” he said. Vesla Weaver, a professor of political science and African-American studies at Yale, was blunt. “The unprecedented action mirrors what authoritarian and unstable regimes do to the opposition or to officials who pose a threat to unadulterated power,” she said. The panelists: Erica Chenoweth, professor at the school of international studies at the University of Denver; Tom Ginsburg, professor of international law at the University of Chicago; Jennifer Hochschild, professor of government and African American studies at Harvard University; Mala Htun, professor of political science at the University of New Mexico; Timur Kuran, professor of economics, political science and Islamic studies at Duke University; Frances Lee, professor of government and politics at the University of Maryland; Thomas Nichols, professor of national security affairs at the U.S. Naval War College; Saikrishna Prakash, professor of law and Miller Center fellow at the University of Virginia; Anne-Marie Slaughter, chief executive of New America; and Vesla Weaver, professor of political science at Yale University.  The Upshot provides news, analysis and graphics about politics, policy and everyday life. Follow us on Facebook and Twitter . Sign up for our newsletter. Related Coverage James Comey Is Out at the F.B.I. Here’s What Happens Next. May 10, 2017 Image F.B.I. Director James Comey Is Fired by Trump May 9, 2017 Image Is the Trump Presidency Getting More Normal? Experts Rate 28 Events May 3, 2017 Image How to Prevent Gun Deaths? Where Experts and the Public Agree Jan. 10, 2017 Image Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              