   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Briefing Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Asia and Australia Edition Russia, Kabul, Roger Federer: Your Monday Briefing By  Mike Ives Jan. 28, 2018 查看简体中文版 查看繁體中文版 Good morning. Scared elephants, social media bots, and good news on the global economy: Here’s your Morning Briefing. Image Credit Agence France-Presse — Getty Images • A decade after the financial crisis,  the world has hit a key marker of recovery . All of the world’s big economies are growing. Asia stands out, led by China, India and Indonesia. There is no single explanation, our correspondent notes, but many of the destructive forces unleashed in the downturn have simply finished playing out. _____ Image Credit The New York Times • Bots for sale: Fake accounts infest the world’s social media platforms, and nearly 15 percent of Twitter’s active users may be bots — including the Communist Party’s flagship News organization, Xinhua News. Read our investigation into social media’s black market . Within China, Twitter is banned. But pervasive propaganda protects President Xi Jinping’s rule and extends the party’s dominance over everyday life. Our Beijing correspondent noted more than 70 posters, billboards, screens and other carriers of state messaging on his daily 30-minute commute. _____ Image Credit Mast Irham/European Pressphoto Agency • Roger Federer , 36, won the Australian Open , under a controversially closed roof. It was his 20th Grand Slam singles title. Caroline Wozniacki won her first. And, by the way, how did the tournament go from a backwater to the largest annual sporting event in the Southern Hemisphere? Our correspondent found the key in its embrace of Asia . _____ Image Credit Andrew Quilty for The New York Times • Afghanistan is bleeding. The Taliban detonated an ambulance packed with explosives in Kabul on Saturday, killing scores of people. It was the city’s second deadly attack in a week. Another casualty: Afghanistan’s main airline is struggling to survive after more than 50 foreign employees fled the country. The Trump administration is preparing to increase the U.S. military presence in Afghanistan. Meawhile, Pakistan’s powerful new army chief is building contacts in China, Iran, Qatar, Russia and Saudi Arabia that could help wean his country from U.S. influence. _____ Image Credit Aung Shine Oo/Associated Press • Myanmar’s army , which seized power from a civilian government in 1962, has spent seven decades fighting domestic ethnic minorities . The army, known as the Tatmadaw, has displaced millions of people while making billions of dollars in profit from natural resources — and enriching its officers. Handing some power back to civilian leaders has done little to change it. “The Tatmadaw is an unreconstructed, unrepentant institution that is abusive to its core,” said an analyst in the country. _____ Image Credit Paras Griffin/Getty Images • Bruno Mars (above), Kendrick Lamar, Cardi B and Lady Gaga are among those performing at the Grammy Awards tonight. If Jay-Z wins, will he respond to President Trump’s comment ? Check our live briefing for updates . And here’s the full list of winners . Business Image • In Vietnam, a state-run company asked the U.S. government for help financing a coal-powered power plant to help feed its fast-growing economy. But the project is under fire from environmentalists, and its ties to a Kremlin-backed bank could be problematic. • Ingvar Kamprad, the frugal Swedish entrepreneur who created Ikea , died at 91. His driving ambition led him into alcoholism, years of fascination with fascism and a life of almost monastic frugality. • Walmart is making a belated push into digital books , building an app with Rakuten, the Japanese e-commerce giant. • The winner at Davos: China and its campaign to extend its economic reach around the world . But the country’s claim to environmental leadership is complicated by its enormous greenhouse gas emissions . • Travel Frog, a Japanese mobile game that lacks a clear plotline, rose to the top of the free simulation game category in Apple’s App Store in China. It's a bit hard to explain why . •  Here’s a snapshot of global markets . In the News Image Credit Olga Maltseva/Agence France-Presse — Getty Images • Demonstrators turned out across Russia for protests against what they called a lack of choice in the March vote that will almost certainly extend Vladimir Putin’s presidency. The protests’ orchestrator, Aleksei Navalny, was detained by force. [ The New York Times ] • Saudi Arabia’s most prominent investor, Prince Alwaleed bin Talal, has been freed after being locked up for more than 80 days in the Ritz-Carlton hotel in Riyadh. It is widely presumed that he purchased his freedom by handing over a chunk of his immense fortune to the government. [ The New York Times ] • A French mountain climber who had been stranded on a treacherous peak in Pakistan was rescued, but her Polish climbing partner remained in peril. [ The New York Times ] • Prime Minister Malcolm Turnbull released a plan to make Australia one of the world’s top 10 weapons exporters. [ The Guardian ] • In the U.S., the government is now funded till Feb. 8. A new focus for negotiations on a budget: Democratic efforts to protect the special counsel in the Russia inquiry. [ The New York Times ] • A series of fires and accidents in South Korea , including a fire on Friday that killed at least 37 people at a hospital, cast doubt on President Moon Jae-in’s vow to make the country safer. [ The New York Times ] •  Hong Kong disqualified a 21-year-old democracy advocate from running for the local legislature, making her the latest young politician to be barred from public office. [ The New York Times ] • Hackers breached Coincheck, a cryptocurrency trading exchange in Tokyo, and stole about $534 million in virtual money. [ Reuters ] Smarter Living Tips, both new and old, for a more fulfilling life. • This year,  travel with wellness in mind. • Here’s how to make sure your medicine makes it through customs . • Start the week with a red lentil stew spiced with turmeric, chili and ginger. Noteworthy Image Greg Du Toit/Barcroft Media, via Getty Images • Elephants are scaredy cats. (Yes, you heard right.) A new study explains why Asian and African elephants are terrified of bees — and why that’s good for farmers. • Do musical motifs cut across cultures? Take our quiz that’s based on new scientific research . • What does a suffering person want to hear? In our Opinion section, a woman living with a serious cancer weighed in . • “Something of a bore” is how our critic described “Padmaavat,” a lavish film that inspired protests and threats of violence in India . Back Story Image Credit Sam Falk/The New York Times He was born in San Francisco and named after a Confederate general. But he died as a celebrated poet of the United States and its people , especially the flinty farmers of New England. Robert Frost, whose life was full of paradoxes, died on this day in 1963 in a Boston hospital. A gifted observer of nature and the human spirit , he won four Pulitzer Prizes and spoke at John F. Kennedy’s inauguration in 1961. Frost lived for years in Vermont and New Hampshire, initially working as a farmer, reporter and shoemaker. His poetry, including works like “The Road Not Taken” and “Stopping by Woods on a Snowy Evening,” used colloquial language and spoke to an urbanized generation that longed for the simplicities of rural life. “I don’t like to write anything I don’t see,” he said before his 88th birthday. But he “had no illusions about the life of the soil,” The Times noted the day after his death in 1963, in part because he knew it could be “spiritually crippling and physically exhausting.” _____ Your Morning Briefing is published weekday mornings and updated online. Browse past briefings here . We have briefings timed for the Australian , Asian , European and American mornings. And our Australia bureau chief offers a weekly letter adding analysis and conversations with readers. You can sign up for these and other Times newsletters here . What would you like to see here? Contact us at asiabriefing@nytimes.com . Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              