   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Briefing Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Donald Trump, North Korea, South Sudan: Your Monday Briefing Image A young boy in Rimenze, South Sudan. The U.N. has declared a famine in the country. Credit Tyler Hicks/The New York Times By  Mark A. Walsh March 6, 2017 (Want to get this briefing by email? Here’s the sign-up .) Good morning. Here’s what you need to know: • A new travel ban. Mr. Trump issued a new executive order on immigration . Image Mr. Trump arriving at Andrews Air Force Base outside Washington on Friday. Credit Stephen Crowley/The New York Times The new version, reworked to try to withstand legal scrutiny, excludes Iraq but retains temporary travel restrictions on six other predominantly Muslim countries and on all refugees. • Trump calls for wiretapping inquiry. President Trump has demanded that Congress investigate whether former President Barack Obama ordered the tapping of phones at Trump Tower before the election. The F.B.I. director, James B. Comey, asked the Justice Department to publicly reject Mr. Trump’s assertion, senior American officials said. Here’s where the accusations originated . We also answered some of the questions they raise. • A flurry of deregulation. Federal agencies and Congress have suspended or reversed more than 90 rules in the past month and a half, giving more freedoms to bankers, gun sellers, polluters and others. Automakers could be the next to benefit , as they near a victory to roll back fuel standards. • Growing tensions on Korean Peninsula. North Korea launched several ballistic missiles from its long-range rocket site on Monday morning, the South Korean military said. A Times investigation found that Mr. Trump inherited a covert cyberwar against the North’s nuclear launch systems , which he must decide whether to continue. • Anti-Semitic acts stoke concern in Israel. Israelis are used to hearing about nationalism in Europe that has fed anti-Semitism. But many have looked to America  as a refuge from bigotry , not another front for it. Image Damaged headstones at Mount Carmel Jewish Cemetery in Philadelphia last month. Credit Jacqueline Larma/Associated Press •  The Daily, your audio news report. In today’s episode, two stories about the transition of power in the White House. Listen from a computer , on an iOS device or on an Android device . Business • U.S. stocks are up 5 percent since Mr. Trump took office, but some hedge fund managers are bracing for a sell-off. Here’s a snapshot of global markets . • Time Inc.’s revenue has fallen every year since 2011, and investors have punished its stock since the company was spun off from Time Warner nearly three years ago. Potential buyers are lining up . • Scandals involving companies like Samsung are threatening South Korea’s postwar economic order . Smarter Living •  If you start your day with our Morning Briefing, you may already be aware of the power of a morning routine. It reduces decision fatigue and can help you be more productive through the day . •  The Times  looked at the rituals of some successful figures in 1997. We found they wake very early, exercise and consume a lot of news. • This month , we’ll be discussing what practices work best. Join the conversation by emailing us a few sentences about your routine. On Thursday, we’ll publish some of the best tips. • Recipe of the  day : Try a low-stress pasta dinner with butter, sage and Parmesan . Over the weekend • South Sudan’s war , which has left tens of thousands dead, is spreading to previously peaceful areas. The country appears to be cracking apart . • There could be health benefits to delaying retirement , recent U.S. studies suggest, particularly among those who find work fulfilling, such as teachers and some office workers. • “Logan,” an R-rated “X-Men” spinoff, was No. 1 at the North American box office . Noteworthy •  You may want to marry my husband. After learning she didn’t have long to live, a woman composed a dating profile for the man she will leave behind . “He is an easy man to fall in love with,” she writes in a Modern Love column. “I did it in one day.” • An Art  Deco masterpiece. The tower of One Wall Street is among New York’s overlooked jewels. We take a look at the restoration of the landmark building’s lobby and enjoy the views from the roof in today’s 360 video . Video One Wall Street, a landmark Manhattan office building, is currently being converted into residences. Step inside the historic skyscraper and the restoration of its lobby, known as the Red Room, in this 360° video. Published On March 6, 2017 Credit Image by Benjamin Norman for The New York Times. Technology by Samsung. • Confronting a shameful past. Harvard hosted a conference examining the long-neglected topic of connections between universities and slavery . “Only by coming to terms with history,” Harvard’s president said, “can we free ourselves to create a more just world.” • Will the Yankees let their hair down? The lush locks of Clint Frazier, a top outfield prospect, pose a question for a team that has a strict grooming code: Is there room for a man bun in the Bronx? Image Clint Frazier at Yankees spring training in February. Credit Zack Wittman for The New York Times “I think people are making my hair bigger than my game,” he said. “I’m here to play baseball.” • Africa’s first female president. Helene Cooper, a Times reporter who grew up in Liberia, tells the story of how women there upended centuries of male rule in 2005. Back Story On Feb. 22, The Washington Post added a new slogan beneath its nameplate: “Democracy Dies in Darkness.” The motto was not, The Post said, a response to President Trump’s attacks on the news media, which he has called “the enemy of the people.” Image The new slogan is the first for The Washington Post, which was founded in 1877. Credit Brendan Smialowski/Agence France-Presse — Getty Images Executives at The Post had planned on a slogan long before Mr. Trump became the Republican presidential nominee. They sought a phrase that “must be memorable and may be slightly uncomfortable for us at first.” The newspaper acknowledged that the motto was “dramatic” and had become fodder for comics (Slate made a list of “ 15 Metal Albums Whose Titles Are Less Dark Than The Washington Post’s New Motto ”). The Columbia Journalism Review pointed out that slogans have been a tradition in American newspapers for centuries. Consider such classics as “Daily Diary of the American Dream” (The Wall Street Journal), or “If You Don’t Want It Printed, Don’t Let It Happen” (The Aspen Daily News in Colorado). The New York Times has used “ All the News That’s Fit to Print ” since 1897, but that wasn’t its first motto. When Adolph Ochs bought the paper he held a contest for the new slogan. The winning entry was “It Will Not Soil the Breakfast Cloth.” Charles McDermid contributed reporting. _____ Photographs may appear out of order for some readers. Viewing this version of the briefing should help. Your Morning Briefing is published weekdays at 6 a.m. Eastern and updated on the web all morning . What would you like to see here? Contact us at briefing@nytimes.com . You can sign up here to get the briefing delivered to your inbox. Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              