   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Politics Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by fact check of the day Trump Wrongly Links Departures of Two F.B.I. Officials to Russia Investigation The president suggested that investigators were “getting caught.” But the F.B.I. officials left voluntarily and were not involved with the Russia inquiry when they resigned. Image The F.B.I. headquarters on Pennsylvania Avenue in Washington. Credit Al Drago/The New York Times By  Linda Qiu May 7, 2018 President Trump said Lisa Page, who may hold the record for the most Emails in the shortest period of time (to her Lover, Peter S), and attorney Baker, are out at the FBI as part of the Probers getting caught? Why is Peter S still there? What a total mess. Our Country has to get back to Business! — Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) May 7, 2018  The Facts This requires context. Mr. Trump is questioning why Lisa Page and James A. Baker, two former F.B.I. officials, left the bureau last week, seeming to suggest that their departures had something to do with their roles in the Russia investigation. The two lawyers had previously advised James B. Comey, the former F.B.I. director. But as The New York Times reported on May 4, their departures were voluntary and unrelated. And in Mr. Baker’s case, he told The Times that he would be writing for Lawfare , a national security law blog affiliated with the Brookings Institution. Contrary to Mr. Trump’s suggestion, neither was forced out of the F.B.I. Though they were both at points involved in the Russia investigation, neither was part of the special counsel’s inquiry when they resigned. During the 2016 election, Ms. Page exchanged messages with Peter Strzok, an agent involved in the Russia investigation, that expressed views critical of Mr. Trump and other political figures. Mr. Strzok was removed from the investigation last summer and reassigned to the F.B.I.’s human resources department. Linda Qiu is a fact-check reporter, based in Washington. She came to the Times in 2017 from the fact-checking service PolitiFact. @ylindaqiu Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              