   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Politics Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Comey’s Memoir Offers Visceral Details on a President ‘Untethered to Truth’ Image President Trump and James B. Comey at the White House days after the inauguration. Credit Al Drago/The New York Times By  Michael D. Shear April 12, 2018 WASHINGTON — Donald J. Trump asked Director James B. Comey of the F.B.I. to investigate and knock down a lurid but unverified report that placed Mr. Trump years earlier in a Moscow hotel suite with prostitutes, explaining to Mr. Comey that the fantastic story was untrue and was painful and distressing to his wife, Melania Trump. Mr. Comey describes two January 2017 conversations between himself and Mr. Trump in “A Higher Loyalty: Truth, Lies and Leadership,” Mr. Comey’s new memoir, which is set to be released Tuesday. The New York Times acquired a copy of the book before its release, and accounts of the exchange appeared in reports by several other news organizations on Thursday evening. By Mr. Comey’s accounts, Mr. Trump, then the president-elect, disputed the so-called Steele dossier, a document compiled by a former British intelligence officer that detailed an allegation in which Mr. Trump watched prostitutes urinate on each other. Mr. Comey writes that Mr. Trump insisted that “there’s no way I would let people pee on each other around me” in part because he is a self-professed germophobe. “No way.” [ President Trump called James Comey an “untruthful slime ball” on Twitter after excerpts from the book were released. ] Four months later, Mr. Trump abruptly fired Mr. Comey, setting in motion a cascade of political and legal consequences that led directly to the appointment of Robert S. Mueller III as special counsel overseeing the federal investigation into Russian interference in the 2016 election. Mr. Comey and Mr. Trump have been engaged in a verbal war with each other, often on Twitter, since then. The 304-page memoir by Mr. Comey is the only firsthand, insider account to emerge so far by a former Trump official describing what it was like to work in the chaotic early days of the administration. In it, Mr. Comey, a veteran law enforcement agent, writes unsparingly about Mr. Trump, calling him a tempestuous president whose connection to honesty was tenuous at best. “This president is unethical, and untethered to truth and institutional values,” Mr. Comey writes in the book, saying his service to Mr. Trump recalled for him the days when he investigated the mob in New York. “The silent circle of assent. The boss in complete control. The loyalty oaths. The us-versus-them worldview. The lying about all things, large and small, in service to some code of loyalty that put the organization above morality and above the truth.” With the book’s release set for next week, Mr. Comey is planning a media blitz, beginning with an intensely hyped interview with ABC News that is set to air Sunday night. Republican allies of Mr. Trump’s have already set in motion a counteroffensive, creating a “Lyin’ Comey” website aimed at discrediting the former F.B.I. chief. Mr. Comey’s book does not include dramatic new revelations about the Russia investigation itself, which is continuing. But Mr. Comey does not pull punches as he provides rigorous detail — pulled from his contemporaneous notes — about his charged interactions with Mr. Trump during the transition and in the White House. In a memoir laced with excruciating detail, Mr. Comey — who is 6 feet 8 inches tall — describes meeting Mr. Trump for the first time, noting that the soon-to-be-president, at 6 feet 3 inches tall, appeared shorter than he had assumed. “His face appeared slightly orange, with bright white half-moons under his eyes where I assumed he placed small tanning goggles,” Mr. Comey writes of his impressions during that first in-person session. He said Mr. Trump had “impressively coifed, bright blond hair, which upon close inspection looked to be all his.” The book also serves as a platform for Mr. Comey to once again defend his handling of the Hillary Clinton email investigation and the decisions that for a time made him one of the most despised figures among political liberals and other supporters of Mrs. Clinton. [ Read our review of Mr. Comey’s memoir. ] However, Mr. Comey acknowledges that he thought Mrs. Clinton would win the presidency and said it is “entirely possible” that he decided to reveal that the email investigation had started up again 11 days before the election because he was primarily concerned that if he concealed the renewed investigation, it would make her an “illegitimate president.” Would he have made a different decision if Mr. Trump had been ahead in the polls? “I don’t know,” Mr. Comey concedes. The book is a personal memoir more than a direct attack on Mr. Trump, the 45th president, and many of the chapters do not mention him. Mr. Comey describes his upbringing and the path that led him to the Justice Department and the F.B.I. And he retells stories from his days working for President George W. Bush. He offers less-than-flattering portraits of Mr. Bush’s political and diplomatic advisers, including Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice and David S. Addington, a top adviser to Vice President Dick Cheney. From their point of view, he says, “The war on terrorism justified stretching, if not breaking, the written law.” He writes more fondly of his time serving President Barack Obama, describing a scene in the Oval Office just after the 2016 election when Mr. Obama said he remained convinced of Mr. Comey’s integrity and abilities despite the hatred coming from people who blamed him for Mrs. Clinton’s loss. “I want you to know that nothing — nothing — has happened in the last year to change my view,” Mr. Obama told him. “Boy were those words I needed to hear,” Mr. Comey says he replied. Mr. Comey is less gentle with former Attorney General Loretta E. Lynch, whom he skewers for suggesting that he refer to the Clinton email case as “a matter,” not an “investigation.” He says that he responded to her, “The F.B.I. didn’t do matters.” But the book, which soared to the top of best-seller lists well before its actual release, has not prompted intense interest because of Mr. Comey’s efforts to put his spin on the historical record of his life in law enforcement. It is the chapters about Mr. Trump that has Washington on edge and the public keenly interested. Mr. Comey reveals that after he was fired, he received what he calls “an emotional call” from John F. Kelly, who was then the secretary of homeland security and would go on to become Mr. Trump’s second chief of staff. During the call, Mr. Kelly said he was “sick” about the firing and intended to quit in protest, Mr. Comey writes, adding: “I urged Kelly not to do that, arguing that the country needed principled people around this president. Especially this president.” Mr. Comey has already told some of the stories about Mr. Trump that he writes about in the book, including descriptions of a January 2017 dinner in which the former F.B.I. director says the president sought to extract a loyalty pledge from him. He describes in detail the moment when he says Mr. Trump raised the issue of Michael T. Flynn, the onetime national security adviser who had been fired for lying. “I hope you can see your way clear to letting this go, to letting Flynn go,” Mr. Trump said, according to Mr. Comey. “It was very concerning,” Mr. Comey writes. But in the book, Mr. Comey goes much further than he has before in offering his assessment of the president’s character. Describing one exchange with Mr. Trump and Reince Priebus, then the chief of staff, Mr. Comey comments on the president’s assertions of what “everyone thinks” and what is “obviously true.” “I could see how easily everyone in the room could become a co-conspirator to his preferred set of facts, or delusions,” Mr. Comey writes about the president. He says he watched Mr. Trump build “a cocoon of alternative reality” around the people in the room. Mr. Comey devotes a good part of the book to his worry about the damage that Mr. Trump and his presidency are doing to the country’s future. “We are experiencing a dangerous time in our country,” he writes, “with a political environment where basic facts are disputed, fundamental truth is questioned, lying is normalized and unethical behavior is ignored, excused or rewarded.” A version of this article appears in print on , on Page A 1 of the New York edition with the headline: Visceral Details, and Grim View Of President, in Comey Memoir . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Related Coverage James Comey Has a Story to Tell. It’s Very Persuasive. April 12, 2018 Image F.B.I. Director James Comey Is Fired by Trump May 9, 2017 Image Comey Tried to Shield the F.B.I. From Politics. Then He Shaped an Election. April 22, 2017 Image Show All Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              