   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Book Review Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Letters to the Editor Jan. 19, 2018 Holy Days To the Editor: Studies have shown that our world is becoming less religious and that more people no longer believe in God. Your Dec. 24 issue reviewed books concerning various aspects of religion, but there was no representation of the shift toward a secular society. Atheists have little faith in the supernatural, but we would hate to think our faith in The New York Times is in peril. DENNIS B. APPLETON MADISON, WIS. Vietnam To the Editor: Jeff Shesol’s review of “Playing With Fire,” by Lawrence O’Donnell (Jan. 7), speculates that Senator Eugene McCarthy’s quest for the 1968 presidential nomination may have prolonged the conflict in Vietnam by widening divisions in the Democratic Party and thereby helped elect Richard Nixon, who escalated the American military intervention in Southeast Asia. While accurate about Nixon’s escalation strategy, Shesol overlooks or ignores the fact that the vice president and Democratic nominee, Hubert Humphrey, had supported military escalation in Vietnam for years and thus in all likelihood would have prolonged the war as well. One of the reasons Humphrey’s presidential campaign faltered was that young voters did not trust him on the war issue. LARRY D. WOODS NASHVILLE Holiday Handel To the Editor: Readers of Leon Botstein’s review of Jonathan Keates’s “Messiah” (Dec. 24) should know that Handel doesn’t need to be appreciated only on Christmas or Easter. “See the Conquering Hero,” from his oratorio “Judas Maccabaeus,” is now a Hanukkah song for children called “Hava Narima.” It sounds great in Hebrew. ZALMAN SHOVAL TEL AVIV Listening to Gibbon To the Editor: Daniel Mendelsohn (By the Book, Jan. 7) is kidding himself if he thinks he’s getting the whole enchantment of “The Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire” by listening to it on tape. If, as I suspect, it doesn’t include the footnotes, he’s missing out on some of the wittiest and most malicious delights of Gibbon’s book. JIM SKOFIELD WALPOLE, N.H. The Times welcomes letters from readers. Letters for publication should include the writer’s name, address and telephone number. Letters should be addressed to The Editor, The New York Times Book Review, 620 Eighth Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10018. The email address is books@nytimes.com . Letters may be edited for length and clarity. We regret that because of the large volume of mail received, we are unable to acknowledge or to return unpublished letters.  Follow New York Times Books on Facebook and Twitter (@nytimesbooks) , and sign up for our newsletter . A version of this article appears in print on , on Page 5 of the Sunday Book Review with the headline: Letters . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              