   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index New York Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Stand Up for Your Identity, Hillary Clinton Tells Graduates in Brooklyn Image “Never let anyone silence your voices,” Hillary Clinton said on Thursday in a speech to the graduating class from Medgar Evers College at Barclays Center in Brooklyn. She called on graduates to uphold the legacy of civil rights leaders. Credit Chang W. Lee/The New York Times By  Annie Correal June 8, 2017 Speaking at Barclays Center in Brooklyn on Thursday, not far from her presidential campaign headquarters, Hillary Clinton did not beat around the bush. “I wish I had flown in from the White House,” she told graduates of Medgar Evers College , a Brooklyn school that is part of the City University of New York. “But I’m just as happy to be here anyway.” It was the only explicit reference to Washington in her 20-minute address, though the commencement coincided with dramatic events unfolding there that day: James B. Comey, the former F.B.I. director, was testifying before the Senate Intelligence Committee . Her speech, however, was still pointedly political. Acknowledging the diversity of the Medgar Evers student body and of Brooklyn, Mrs. Clinton called on graduates to uphold the legacy of figures like the slain civil rights leader for whom the school is named, by fighting for voting rights and standing up against the rise of hate crimes. “Never let anyone silence your voices,” she said. “Make your voices heard every single day. And when they even try to dismiss your lived experiences, maybe they’ll call it ‘identity politics,’ stand up and say your identity is as important and valuable as the identity of anybody else who lives in the United States of America.” Though she never named President Trump, her address was filled with thinly veiled references to his administration, its policies and its controversies. Speaking of Medgar Evers College, which was founded in 1970 in the Crown Heights neighborhood, she said: “It opened during a period of tumultuous change in America. The Selma and Montgomery marches had taken placed just five years earlier. We were facing assassinations, political turmoil, investigations.” Here she paused for effect. Calling the class an “inspiring group,” she said: “You come from 94 countries, speak 44 languages. You embody what makes New York and America great already .” At that, the audience in the arena roared. Mrs. Clinton has made few public appearances since her defeat by Mr. Trump in the presidential election last fall, though she spoke at the Women in the World  event in New York in April. She gave the commencement address at Wellesley , her alma mater, last month. Roughly 1,300 Medgar Evers College students were in this year’s graduating class, and many were nontraditional students raising families — and many come from immigrant households. The oldest graduate, as Mrs. Clinton mentioned, was 75. The youngest was 17. The area around the school in Crown Heights has a large Caribbean population. The graduates’ mortar boards were decorated with the colors of Caribbean flags, and at least one family in the audience waved flags from Jamaica. The students who spoke at the ceremony mentioned families in Trinidad and Tobago, Barbados and Ecuador. Image Graduating students decorated their hats with country flags and messages. Credit Chang W. Lee/The New York Times Like many in his class, Jonathan Arcentales, the valedictorian, is the first in his family to graduate from college. His parents, a housekeeper and a construction worker, are from Ecuador. In an interview, Mr. Arcentales, 22, praised what he called Mrs. Clinton’s “plain dedication.” “I understand that she doesn’t come from the same social class that I did — because my family comes from poverty,” he said. “But what she shares with all of us graduates is that she worked hard and has a positive attitude.” At Wellesley, Mrs. Clinton, 69, was given a hero’s welcome. At Medgar Evers, the reception was slightly cooler. When asked to stand for the speaker, at various points several dozen rows of people stayed in their seats. There were scattered boos. One graduate, Oluwatobi Olufeko, said: “I’m personally not excited. I honestly don’t think she’s done much for the black community. Her husband in his time as president passed a bill that incarcerated a large number of black males.” Ms. Olufeko, 20, was born and was raised in Brooklyn by Nigerian parents, and she will go on to study neuroscience at the State University of New York at Stony Brook. She said there were many graduates who shared her opinion on Mrs. Clinton and her invitation to the ceremony. “We’re not upset, but we’re not excited.” Outside Barclays, protesters from a Haitian organization, Committee to Mobilize Against Dictatorship in Haiti, or Komokoda, spoke out against what they said was the Clinton Foundation’s misuse of funds intended for earthquake victims in 2010 and held up signs with slogans like “Hillary Clinton: Not a Role Model for Black Youth.” In the arena, where a large photograph of Mr. Evers hovered on a screen, Mrs. Clinton and Medgar Evers’s daughter Reena Evers-Everette spoke of a long friendship between the two families. Mr. Evers’s widow, Myrlie Evers-Williams, could not attend because of medical issues, but prepared a video message in which she praised Mrs. Clinton. “You are coming into a world that is torn today,” said Ms. Evers-Williams, a former leader of the N.A.A.C.P. “We do have people who are fighting for justice, for peace,” she said. “Who can better represent that than Hillary Clinton?” Mrs. Clinton received an honorary doctorate during the ceremony. If some were underwhelmed by the college’s choice of speaker, many in the audience were moved to see Mrs. Clinton get back onstage, and so close to their sons and daughters. “It’s amazing, amazing,” said Marcia Tisson, 55, originally from St. Lucia. Ms. Tisson raised two daughters while working as a babysitter. The oldest, Paulina Tisson, was graduating at 32; her two children were there to watch her cross the stage. The elder Ms. Tisson said she had been despondent the night she learned the election results, and thrilled when she heard Mrs. Clinton would be speaking at the commencement. “I’m so proud of her,” she said, pulling her crimson scarf tight around her shoulders. “She is a strong woman. She is like me.” Mrs. Clinton herself gave her defeat only a passing mention. “Oh, I’ve had a few setbacks in my own life, and losing an election is pretty devastating, especially considering who I lost to,” she said to roaring applause. “But even that pales in comparison to what Myrlie went through, and frankly what a lot of people go through every day.” A version of this article appears in print on , on Page A 25 of the New York edition with the headline: Stand Up for Your Identity, Clinton Tells Graduating Class in Brooklyn . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Related Coverage At Wellesley, Hillary Clinton Criticizes Trump and Invokes Nixon Resignation May 26, 2017 Image Hillary Clinton to Give Commencement Address at Medgar Evers College April 7, 2017 Image Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              