   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Politics Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by News Analysis A Debate Over How Long Democracy Can Wage Battles in Shadows By  Charlie Savage May 14, 2015 WASHINGTON — When the House voted this week to end and replace the National Security Agency’s once-secret program that collects Americans’ phone records in bulk, it was both an ordinary act of government and a striking exception to post-9/11 national security policy making. The bill — which now faces a fight in the Senate because the Republican majority leader, Senator Mitch McConnell of Kentucky, wants to keep the old program without changes — was ordinary because that is how the American government is supposed to work. After a public debate about a proposal, Congress passes something that explicitly authorizes it and sets the rules. But the open debate and vote was also striking because national security programs have so often been created in secret over the past 14 years — from the C.I.A.’s now-defunct torture program to sweeping surveillance activities to the use of drones to kill terrorism suspects away from combat zones. Secrecy has always been traditional and accepted in wartime, but traditional wars have an end. Under two administrations now, as the United States has remained on a permanent war footing against Al Qaeda and its splintering, morphing progeny, tensions over fighting battles in the shadows have steadily escalated. If this is a forever war, can a democracy wage it in secret? Last week, the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit, in New York, suggested that it could not. In a unanimous ruling that roiled the political debate in Congress over the phone records program, a three-judge panel said that the existing program was illegal. The heart of the ruling was the principle of self-government: A program of that magnitude cannot be created in secret and without public debate. Perhaps, the court said, the phone logs program “is required by national security needs in the face of the dangers of contemporary domestic and international terrorism.” And yet, the court added, “We would expect such a momentous decision to be preceded by substantial debate, and expressed in unmistakable language” by Congress. Steven Aftergood, the director of the Federation of American Scientists’ Project on Government Secrecy, said the appeals court ruling reflected the tensions between what he portrayed as the executive branch’s instinctive secrecy about national security and the need for open debate if the war on terror is to be permanent. “Over time, it becomes a question of what is it that we are protecting,” he said. “Are we protecting simply physical security and our geographical boundaries, or are we protecting a system of political values? That includes open deliberation of national security policies. And for many people it is the latter. It’s not that physical security is unimportant. But it is a means to an end, and the end is an open society that includes vibrant debate.” A range of officials involved with the phone records program since its secret creation by the Bush administration in October 2001 gave similar explanations for their repeated reluctance to go to Congress for explicit authorization. Permitting public debate about the program, the current and former officials said, would have tipped off the enemy and reduced its value as a wartime tool. “When you put something out there and have a debate, terrorists get an alert, so the question is, how publicly are you going to do this?” said Robert L. Deitz, who was general counsel of the N.S.A. from 1998 to 2006. “That is a nice thing for a terrorist to know because they can take countermeasures. To my mind, all these questions come down to, what is the trade-off between transparency and security?” The appeals court ruling was just one example of the pressures on the executive branch to disclose information about national security policy to the public. Last year, a different three-judge panel on the Second Circuit ruled that the Obama administration had to make public Justice Department memos about the scope and limits of the executive branch’s claimed power to target and kill an American citizen deemed a terrorist. In Congress, Democrats on the Senate Intelligence Committee pushed last year to declassify a 500-page summary of its investigation into the C.I.A. torture program, even as executive branch officials warned that its publication would endanger Americans’ lives . Individual leakers have also taken matters into their own hands with two bulk leaks of hundreds of thousands of secret government documents. The leakers were the Army private now known as Chelsea Manning, who is serving a 35-year military prison sentence, and the former intelligence contractor Edward Snowden, who has been charged under the Espionage Act and whose disclosures included the bulk phone program that the appeals court found to be illegal. They justified their disclosures in terms of fostering public debate about national security policy. Leaders of mainstream news organizations appear to be less willing to withhold information from the public at the request of the government. This includes the recent explanation offered by the executive editor of The New York Times, Dean Baquet, about his decision to publish the names of C.I.A. officials running the agency’s drone campaign. Citing a need for public debate and accountability, Mr. Baquet essentially treated them under rules for military officers who do the same thing rather than the rules for spies. (Former intelligence leaders have sharply criticized Mr. Baquet’s decision .) Notwithstanding such pushback, 14 years into the open-ended war there is no consensus on whether or where to redraw the line. A few hours after last week’s appeals court ruling, Secretary of Defense Ashton B. Carter was asked about a statement by Al Qaeda’s Yemen branch that a recent American drone strike had killed one of its senior leaders . Mr. Carter said the government would provide no information to the public about the topic. “We just don’t talk about those, and certainly not from this podium,” Mr. Carter said , adding: “I’m afraid I can’t really talk about particular places, because that’s in the nature of things.” Mr. Carter’s rebuff provoked a sharp response from Martin Lederman, a Georgetown law professor who earlier in the Obama administration served in the Justice Department’s Office of Legal Counsel and helped shape the legal parameters for drone strikes. Noting that it is no longer even officially a secret that the United States uses force against Al Qaeda’s Yemen affiliate, Mr. Lederman said such continued silence looked “absurd” and “indefensible.” “Perhaps there are good reasons for such nonacknowledgement here; but, if so, they certainly aren’t obvious: After all, how common has it been, throughout history, for militaries to refuse even to confirm when they have successfully killed high-level commanders of enemy forces?” Mr. Lederman wrote in a blog post, adding that the secrecy made it look “as though the government has something to hide, even if it doesn’t.” A version of this article appears in print on , on Page A 14 of the New York edition with the headline: A Debate Over How Long Democracy Can Wage Battles in Shadows . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Related Coverage House Votes to End N.S.A.’s Bulk Phone Data Collection May 13, 2015 Image Court Ruling on N.S.A.’s Data Collection Jolts Both Defenders and Reformers May 8, 2015 Image N.S.A. Collection of Bulk Call Data Is Ruled Illegal May 7, 2015 Image Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              