   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Times Insider Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Now in Previews: Presidential Campaign Drama By  Patrick Healy Sept. 7, 2016 Times Insider delivers behind-the-scenes insights from The New York Times. In this piece, Patrick Healy, a Times political correspondent, draws on his theater-beat past to preview the Shakespearean drama likely to ensue in the final, mad dash to the November election. Image Workers set up the stage at the Landmark Theater ahead of a campaign event for Hillary Clinton in Port Washington, N.Y., in April. Credit Bryan Thomas for The New York Times As the presidential candidates kicked off the fall run-up to the general election with frenetic campaigning on Labor Day, I couldn’t decide if this moment in America’s national drama was akin to the start of Act II (after an exceptionally long first act) or if our politics had finally reached Shakespearean levels worthy of a full five acts — with the requisite plotting and pathos, conflict and catharsis, and high stakes and bravura. The truth is, even five acts might not do justice to this race. Woe that we no longer have August Wilson to undertake another magisterial 10-play cycle, this time about the startling and sublime dimensions of this long campaign. I left the theater beat at The Times 18 months ago to cover the 2016 election, but I’ve frequently found myself using my instincts for great drama during this adventure — like capturing Donald J. Trump’s appearance in the Republican convention hall after his arch-nemesis, Ted Cruz, told the party faithful to “vote your conscience,” and the scene of Khizr Khan waving a copy of the United States Constitution on stage at the Democratic convention. “Mr. Trump, have you even read the Constitution?” Mr. Khan said. “You have sacrificed nothing and no one.” Though campaigns and theater have many common elements, what makes for greatness in both is absorbing and psychologically complex characters. The 2016 race has two for the ages in Mr. Trump and Hillary Clinton. Never have the nominees of both parties been so unpopular and controversial with voters. Mr. Trump and Mrs. Clinton are either heroes or villains depending on your point of view, but without question they are the antithesis of bland. Think what you will of Mr. Trump, but he is a playwright’s dream — he will say and do anything without concern for custom, logic, diplomacy or sometimes even the truth, a style that electrifies some audiences and horrifies others. He has a bit of Lear in him — the self-certainty and the self-regard and, of course, the keen ability to alienate people who might normally favor him. Image Campaign signs fill the seats at the Fox Theater before a campaign event for Donald J. Trump in Atlanta in June. Credit Damon Winter/The New York Times I’ve often wondered if Mr. Trump believes what he’s saying or if his political persona is actually a theatrical creation by Trump-the-inveterate-showman. Mr. Trump has insisted to me several times that he stands by his comments and that he sees no point in running for president if he can’t be himself. What is clear is that, like any memorable character, he is deeply effective at angering and inspiring people. A few former sources of mine on the Broadway beat have asked if Mrs. Clinton is a Lady Macbeth type, ruthless and power-hungry. I’ve never viewed her that way. During the 2008 campaign, when I was assigned to cover her day to day, she was a narrowly conceived character created by consultants — the battle-tested political veteran who wanted Americans to see her as a commander in chief who would be as strong and tough as any man. In the current race, where I write about all the candidates and politics at-large, she is a more fully rounded protagonist who speaks somewhat more easily about herself. She draws on her memories as a daughter, mother and grandmother to relate to people who have endured hardships (like her mother, Dorothy Rodham, did) and express empathy for those who have lost children to gun violence. In other ways Mrs. Clinton is unchanged. She remains reluctant to admit fault: She struggled for months over whether to apologize for using private email as Secretary of State, before finally saying “I’m sorry” last September, just like she refused in 2008 to say she was wrong for voting as a senator to authorize military action in Iraq. (In 2014 she announced in her memoir that she got the vote “wrong.”) And she can still be less-than-straightforward, as in her brief insistence that the F.B.I. director, James B. Comey, had called her statements about her private email server “truthful.” At her best she can come off like the resilient and resourceful Rosalind from “As You Like It,” and in less flattering ways she can mirror Hamlet, with her differing public and private personas, and her secretive and tactical instincts. And let’s not forget the secondary characters! A president in twilight, desperate to defeat one old enemy (Trump) and help another who made peace with him (Clinton); a garrulous vice president, who himself wanted to run but chose not to because of grief; and a former president and husband to the current Democratic nominee, at once a major asset and a potential threat. The only thing we’re missing is long-lost twins who will be reunited at the climax of this unfolding drama — at least as far as we know. Related Coverage <div>Ted Cruz Stirs Convention Fury in Pointed Snub of Donald Trump </div> July 20, 2016 Image Hillary Clinton Warns of ‘Moment of Reckoning’ in Speech Accepting Nomination July 28, 2016 Image Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              