   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Movies Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Review: ‘Barbershop: The Next Cut’: Let the Debates Resume Image From left, Anthony Anderson, Common and Cedric the Entertainer in “Barbershop: The Next Cut.” Credit Chuck Zlotnick/Warner Bros. Pictures Barbershop: The Next Cut NYT Critic's Pick Directed by Malcolm D. Lee Comedy PG-13 1h 52m More Information By  A. O. Scott April 14, 2016 Movie sequels don’t need — and frequently don’t have — a good reason to exist, other than to take more money from fans. “Barbershop: The Next Cut,” which revives a popular comedy franchise, has plenty of commercial appeal, not least as a kind of hip-hop all-star acting revue, with Common, Tyga and Nicki Minaj joining Ice Cube and Eve, who anchored the original “Barbershop.” That movie was a hit in 2002, and it spawned two earlier sequels and a cable TV series. This comeback feels like the opposite of cynical, though. If anything, it seems unusually urgent. We’re back at the barbershop because there’s an awful lot to talk about . Video The Times critic A. O. Scott reviews ‘Barbershop: The Next Cut.’ Published On April 14, 2016 Credit Image by Chuck Zlotnick/Warner Bros. , via Associated Press The last feature in the series, “Beauty Shop,” was released in 2005. More than a decade later, Calvin Palmer (Ice Cube) is still running his father’s old haircutting establishment on Chicago’s South Side. To quote an old Mos Def song: A lot of things have changed; a lot of things have not. The shop, for one thing, is now fully unisex, which causes some grumbling from Eddie (Cedric the Entertainer) and allows for a fuller range of argument and intrigue. Chicago has provided the United States with its first black president, and has also found itself swamped in guns and gang violence. Calvin and his wife, Jennifer (Jazsmin Lewis), worry about their teenage son, Jalen (whose birth was part of the wild climax of “Barbershop” and who has grown up into Michael Rainey Jr.). Directed by Malcolm D. Lee (“The Best Man,” “The Best Man Holiday”) from a script by Kenya Barris and Tracy Oliver, “Barbershop: The Next Cut” stands as a companion — and, at times, a pointed challenge — to Spike Lee’s “Chi-Raq.” Both films confront the epidemic of homicide in Chicago, and use that tragedy as a prism to examine a host of other topics, including sexual and electoral politics. Of the two Lees, Malcolm is the less polemical and also the more conventional filmmaker. He passes out soapboxes among the characters, but keeps his feet and his camera firmly planted on the ground. Calvin’s barbershop functions as a semi-theatrical set, and also as a town square, a meeting place where every point of view can find a hearing, or at least a chance to be shouted down. “Barbershop: The Next Cut” is crowded with subplots and characters. Some seem to be there for purely comic purposes, like One-Stop (J. B. Smoove), an all-purpose, motor-mouthed entrepreneur, and Jerrod (Lamorne Morris), the requisite workplace goofball. Love trouble erupts when Draya (Ms. Minaj) starts flirting in earnest with Rashad (Common), who is married to Terri (Eve). J. D. (Anthony Anderson) is promoting his for-profit catering business as a nonprofit community service project. But most of this narrative business exists to provide diversion from — and occasions for — a series of wide-ranging, open-ended arguments. These are often very funny, studded with sharp put-downs and Eddie’s woolly non sequiturs. This installment follows its predecessors in declaring the barbershop a piety-free zone. Anything and anyone can be made into a punch line: Bill Cosby, R. Kelly, Michelle Obama’s hips, Black Lives Matter. It’s pretty much guaranteed that you will take offense at some point, but also that you will be able to laugh off your discomfort and move on. Image Michael Rainey Jr., left, and Ice Cube in “Barbershop: The Next Cut.” Credit Chuck Zlotnick/Warner Bros. Pictures And, above all, to think about what’s being said. Debate topics include President Obama’s legacy, sexism, child-rearing techniques, the different experiences of immigrants and African-Americans, among many others. There are also deeper, more complicated issues in play, contradictions that emerge through the story of Calvin’s struggle to understand and protect his son. Like all the other “Barbershop” movies, this one rests on a bedrock of conservative values: It’s a celebration of small business, hard work, family ties and communal solidarity. But it also resists the easy comforts of respectability politics and bootstrap ideology. The most fascinating — and the most moving — thing about this sprawling, sincere and boisterous movie is its tone. I don’t just mean that it is able to acknowledge real personal and social anguish amid all the joking and banter. In that regard, Mr. Lee shares with Spike Lee an ability to blend the rough with the smooth, to tickle and provoke in a single gesture. In this case, the collision of humor and horror makes a humanist point. Even when terrible things are happening, people will still find time for petty complaints and ordinary pleasures. Nothing can stop us from teasing, flirting or worrying about how we look. Image Nicki Minaj, left, and Eve facing off in the barbershop. The movie is directed by Malcolm D. Lee (“The Best Man”). Credit Chuck Zlotnick/Warner Bros. Pictures Viewed from one angle, “Barbershop: The Next Cut” can seem like a terribly sad film, an expression of fatigue that verges on despair. How can it be that young black men are still dying in such numbers, and that so many neighborhoods are in the grip of fear and alienation? There are plenty of theories, but no good answer. Yet the film, as if obeying both the imperatives of Hollywood comedy and the long tradition of black activism, refuses to succumb to pessimism. Instead of a political position, it offers a potent metaphor for political participation. At the end, Calvin expresses his faith that, “eventually,” Chicago will pull itself together. That might sound like nothing more than wishful thinking — a thin reed of formulaic faith — if the movie had not already supplied solid grounds for hope in the shape of the barbershop itself. It’s a room full of men and women who agree on almost nothing, except their commitment to the place that gives structure and purpose to their lives. Everyone is welcome, and everyone is challenged and improved. In other words, it’s what democracy looks like. “Barbershop: The Next Cut” is rated PG-13 (Parents strongly cautioned). Some rough language, but that’s what democracy sounds like. Running time: 1 hour 51 minutes. Barbershop: The Next Cut NYT Critic's Pick Director Malcolm D. Lee Writers Kenya Barris , Tracy Oliver Stars Ice Cube , Regina Hall , Anthony Anderson , Eve , Cedric the Entertainer Rating PG-13 Running Time 1h 52m Genre Comedy Movie data powered by IMDb.com A version of this article appears in print on , on Page C 1 of the New York edition with the headline: Cutting Hair and Remarks . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Related Coverage With a New ‘Barbershop,’ Malcolm D. Lee Blends Comedy and Commentary April 7, 2016 Image Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              