   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Opinion Supported by Sunday Dialogue Sunday Dialogue: Our Choices for Schools April 26, 2014 Readers react to a letter calling for greater support of public schools rather than “school choice.”  To the Editor: A prevailing belief in the United States is that education is the great opportunity equalizer — a silver bullet that can lift kids out of poverty and transform them into productive citizens. Yet the reality of our “make or break” education system is that race and social class largely determine the quality of one’s educational life, from pre-K to graduate school. “Global cities” like New York, Washington, Chicago and Los Angeles boast diverse populations and cultural depth, but their public school systems remain highly segregated. Much of this has to do with housing and rapid rates of gentrification. But it also has to do with the slow repeal of public policy focused on school integration in favor of privatization, accountability schemes and school choice. A recent University of California, Los Angeles study , for example, argues that in New York City, private and charter schools are exacerbating the problem of “apartheid” schooling. “School choice” does not really involve choice for many American children. It’s a privilege that enables some parents to opt their children out of public schools. These trends pose a no-win ethical dilemma for parents, especially those in big cities: Do we personally invest in our public schools by sending our kids to them, even if that means walking through metal detectors to get to class, coping with high teacher turnover, and having only limited access to academic and extracurricular resources? Or should we provide the best opportunities our privilege can buy, at the expense of things like diversity and social justice that we all claim to value? It’s clear that small class sizes and specialized treatment are good for kids. But they’re good for all kids, not just those who pass entrance tests or win school lotteries or have money. Education is a microcosm of a host of problems linked to social inequality. In the United States, “public” has come to signify the bottom of the barrel. But it should denote our concerted best, what we can achieve when we put our minds — and our wallets — together. HEATHER GAUTNEY New York, April 21, 2014 The writer is an associate professor of sociology at Fordham University. Readers React Professor Gautney is correct to call attention to the highly segregated nature of public schooling in urban centers in the United States today, but misses the mark when she attributes blame to the rise of reforms centered on school choice. School choice may offer the best hope for decreasing segregation. Abandoning choice in favor of traditional neighborhood schools with mandatory attendance zones only ensures that residential segregation is faithfully replicated in public schools. In spite of the growth of alternative public school options, including public charter and magnet schools, the system of neighborhood schools continues to dominate today. A lack of public school choice ensures that only families of means can exercise choice when placing their children in schools. Further, it shields traditional public schools from competitive pressures to change and improve their practices. Strong schools of choice have the potential to attract families across racial and socioeconomic lines and to do so in a way that respects the right of families to choose what is best for their children. This is already happening in many magnet and charter schools across the country, and we should consider incentives that encourage all outstanding schools to seek to attract a diverse range of families. Segregated schools benefit no one, but the answer to fixing this problem does not lie in a return to policies that force low-income and minority families into highly segregated local public schools that they would never choose if they had the means to avoid them. DANIEL OCHS Providence, R.I., April 23, 2014  The writer is a former teacher for a charter network. Professor Gautney’s letter about “unequal schooling” was spot on. “School choice,” especially as it involves vouchers or charter schools, not only undermines democratic public education but also shrinks taxpayer choice, forcing taxpayers to support faith-based and other special interest private and for-profit schools that they would not support voluntarily. School choice all too often promotes the fragmentation of school populations along religious, ideological, socioeconomic status, ethnic and other lines while increasing school costs unnecessarily. EDD DOERR President, Americans for Religious Liberty Silver Spring, Md., April 22, 2014 Professor Gautney’s “ethical dilemma” is a false choice. Parents can advocate for their own kids while fighting for vulnerable children, and they can do both without dissonance. For one thing, ethicists have long agreed that our duties to kin outweigh other considerations. Besides, exercising choice need not make the system less fair. A 2009 RAND study , for instance, found that charter schools do not “skim” elite students, exacerbate segregation or worsen public schools for the students who remain there. What studies do show is that school choice has tremendous potential. A Mathematica Policy Research report found that charter students in Chicago and Florida were significantly likelier to attend and graduate from college, and were earning more as adults, than virtually identical peers who attended ordinary high schools. It is an outrage that access to education is so determined by income. The answer is not fewer options, but more, and more aggressive strategies to open them to everyone. As a parent, demand the best for your kids. As a voter, demand policies that help low-income parents do likewise. This serves social justice. Sacrificing your children’s schooling to placate your conscience does not. Image Credit Dadu Shin ANDREW C. QUINN Washington, April 22, 2014  The writer is a research assistant at the American Enterprise Institute. This is so true. Our society is segregated in a multitude of ways that play out in the schools, especially by race and class, so our schools are segregated and do not offer equal educational opportunity. But the schools are blamed for disparate results as if they should be islands of social justice that can overcome all of the pernicious influences in the societies in which they are located. Meanwhile, many forces are working to ensure that private enterprises can profit from public expenditure in the schools. The public schools are honestly trying to work for everyone in spite of the social ills and private profiteers. But no one supports them; rather they are the scapegoats. SUSAN NERLINGER Kensington, Md., April 22, 2014  The writer is a teacher in a public elementary school. A major reason for unequal schools is that children come to them with unequal abilities and backgrounds. In my experience, putting such diverse children together in a class leads to shortchanging some, if not all, of the students. When our daughter was in the fourth grade in the Houston Independent School District, she and most of her classmates were left to keep themselves busy with worksheets and free reading while the teacher concentrated on a handful of students who were well below grade level. Our daughter was miserable, and after six weeks of that, we were lucky enough to find an opening at a nearby private school. Our daughter flourished in a class geared to her abilities and stayed in private schools for the rest of her education. Big-city public schools will continue to find themselves full of below-average students unless they can find a way to provide better educational experiences for average and above-average students. JAMES G. RUSSELL Alexandria, Va., April 23, 2014 Professor Gautney’s description of “apartheid” schooling is sadly familiar to parents like me with children in urban public schools. But I don’t think parents face a “no-win ethical dilemma” of accepting terrible public schools or fleeing for better ones. Certainly parents are keenly aware of the crumbling buildings, disappearing arts and overcrowded classes in our schools. But my children aren’t getting a “bottom of the barrel” education. Problems exist, but in Boston, a diverse army of parent activists is coming together to resist budget cuts, expose inequities, demand accountability and stop charters from draining our city’s schools. Our investment is not just for our children, but for the right of all children to a quality education. Even as we recognize wider inequalities, parents are doing our “concerted best” to make schools better now. When will politicians and policy makers start doing their part, too? MARY BATTENFELD Boston, April 23, 2014 Professor Gautney rightly bemoans the continuing scandal of public school systems’ failure to educate many children. The prime focus of education reform for many decades has been on “fixing the schools,” when in fact children are educated by the totality of their experience. There is now a growing national movement that recognizes that children need guidance and support both in and out of school, and from birth on — and that a home-school-community collaboration is crucial. In New York, the Children’s Aid Society, Harlem Children’s Zone and many other programs have been pioneering this approach, and happily now both our new mayor and the teachers union, as well as the governor’s Education Reform Commission, support this approach. It is truly an approach in which everyone can work together to support children’s successful development, even if they continue to disagree on many other issues, such as those raised in Professor Gautney’s letter. DAVID S. SEELEY Staten Island, April 22, 1014  The writer is professor emeritus of education at the City University of New York and a former assistant commissioner of education in the Lyndon B. Johnson administration. The Writer Responds School choice is not just about choice; it’s about money and resources. Money can repair broken infrastructure, buy nutritious food and pay qualified teachers. And it can give our youngest a fighting chance. As Mr. Russell says, kids enter schools with uneven abilities. Charter and voucher programs, however effective, siphon much-needed resources away from public schools. And, as Mr. Doerr points out, they undermine taxpayer choice, forcing taxpayers to subsidize the special education of a select few. What’s worse, as Ms. Nerlinger argues, charters are part of broader schemes to privatize education, driven by billionaires like the Walton family (Walmart), who are not only funding the schools, but pushing them through TV ads and campaign contributions. Education involves hundreds of billions of taxpayer dollars, with billions already being outsourced. This raid on public education is being legitimized with an ideology of choice. Consumer choice is not the stuff of freedom and democracy. An informed and engaged public is. Forces of privatization have transformed our vital social institutions into industries. As Mr. Ochs points out, neighborhoods form the nexus of our public school system. Rather than abandon community life, we should be pouring money into community-driven efforts to revive public schools, not selling them off to the highest bidder. HEATHER GAUTNEY New York, April 24, 2014 Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              