   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Politics Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Business Since Birth: Trump’s Children and the Tangle That Awaits Image Donald J. Trump and his family in October during the opening ceremony for the Trump International Hotel in Washington. The hotel is in the federal government’s Old Post Office Building. Credit Stephen Crowley/The New York Times By  Matt Flegenheimer , Rachel Abrams , Barry Meier and Hiroko Tabuchi Dec. 4, 2016 When Donald J. Trump hosted a foreign leader for the first time as president-elect, the guest list included a curious entry: Mr. Trump’s daughter Ivanka, who looked on last month while he and Prime Minister Shinzo Abe of Japan chatted on a white couch high above Manhattan. Some 6,700 miles from Trump Tower, in Tokyo, another exclusive gathering was already underway: a two-day private viewing of Ivanka Trump products, teeming with Trump-branded treasures like a sample of the pale pink dress Ms. Trump wore to introduce her father at the Republican National Convention. Ms. Trump is nearing a licensing deal with the Japanese apparel giant Sanei International, both parties told The New York Times. The largest shareholder of Sanei’s parent company is the Development Bank of Japan, which is wholly owned by the Japanese government. Discussions for the deal have been active for about two years, Ms. Trump’s company said. In that time, she has become something of a local fascination. “At the moment,” said Sayumi Gunji, a lifestyle-magazine editor who attended the viewing, “Ivanka is even more popular here than Mr. Trump.” The circumstances highlight the remarkable tangle awaiting the Trump family, its sprawling business empire and those who have interacted with the family at home and abroad — a web of complications that seems certain to persist even if Mr. Trump makes good on his promise to remove himself from his company’s business operations. Since his election, Mr. Trump has chafed at the suggestion that keeping his business in the family could create problems, despite several episodes during his transition that seemed to mix business and diplomacy. While he has insisted that he faces no legal requirement to turn over the company, the Trump Organization has said it is preparing an “immediate transfer of management” to Mr. Trump’s three eldest children — Donald Jr., 38; Ivanka, 35; and Eric, 32 — along with a team of executives. Last week, the president-elect said on Twitter that he would make an announcement with the children on Dec. 15 about “leaving my great business in total in order to fully focus on running the country.” Doing so is “visually important,” he wrote, “to in no way have a conflict of interest with my various businesses.” Yet an examination of the professional histories of the three children — who also serve on the presidential transition team — shows how deeply the Trump family, Trump business and Trump politics are interwoven, raising significant doubts about how meaningful a wall can ever be erected between Mr. Trump and his heirs at the Trump Organization. For years, the three siblings have operated with few rigid dividing lines in their international travels as ambassadors of the Trump brand, allowing them to lean heavily on the reputation and financial backing of their father while establishing their own credibility in business. It is not merely that the Trumps are at peace commingling family and business. They have known no other way. Officially, all three siblings are executive vice presidents for development and acquisitions. Practically, they have served as their father’s advance guard: the polished public faces of the next Trump generation, conducting initial meetings with prospective partners and reporting back to Mr. Trump. “We don’t take titles particularly seriously at the Trump Organization,” Ms. Trump said in a deposition this year. In depositions in 2011, both brothers likened the company to a “mom and pop” operation. Since the three joined the business, shortly after each graduated from college, lines have had a way of blurring. When Donald Trump Jr.’s investment in a concrete paneling business in South Carolina faltered in recent years, leaving him personally responsible for a loan of more than $3 million, the Trump Organization helped bail him out. Before Eric Trump , who oversees Trump golf courses and a Virginia winery, faced questioning in a lawsuit from aggrieved club members in Florida, his father signed a letter saying that unhappy patrons would be “out.” Image Ivanka Trump promoting her Ready-to-Wear Collection in 2012 in New York. Her company’s products, including clothing, jewelry and handbags, are sold around the world. Credit Slaven Vlasic/Getty Images Ms. Trump, the only sibling to match her father’s instinct for self-commodification, has used the Trump Organization’s payroll, information technology and human resources for her separate brand. Her website’s domain was registered by Trump Organization lawyers. “It is, of course, an advantage to be my father’s daughter,” Ms. Trump told an audience in Malaysia, via videoconference, in 2008. “I think it has afforded me many great opportunities.” All three children declined to be interviewed for this article and did not respond to written questions sent to the Trump Organization about their outside business ties. In its statement about the transfer of management, the Trump Organization said that “the structure that is ultimately selected will comply with all applicable rules and regulations.” Still, for an enterprise premised in large measure on the relentless marketing of a surname, the most famous Trump cannot help looming largest in perpetuity, experts in government ethics say, opening the door to conflicts inside and outside the United States. “Giving to the Trump family would be seen by many foreign leaders as the way to get in with the Trump administration,” said Meredith McGehee, an adviser to the Campaign Legal Center, a nonprofit group, who worried that companies might be tempted to direct business to the Trump children to curry favor with their father. Already, complications abound. The children each hold a stake in the lease that allows the organization to operate the Trump International Hotel out of the federal government’s Old Post Office Building in Washington. Mr. Trump, as president, will appoint the head of the General Services Administration, which manages the property, while his children oversee a hotel with millions of dollars in ties to the agency. During the transition — in which Ms. Trump’s husband, Jared Kushner, is also a key player — diplomatic standards have sometimes been muddied, assuming the freewheeling feel of Mr. Trump’s campaign and business life. Image Donald Trump Jr., left, and Eric Trump, right, with the Philippine developer Jose E. B. Antonio in 2012. Mr. Antonio, who was recently named a special envoy to the United States, is collaborating with the Trumps on a tower in Manila. Credit Pat Roque/Associated Press In addition to attending the meeting with Mr. Abe, Ms. Trump was present for her father’s initial conversation with President Mauricio Macri of Argentina. The children also met recently with Jose E. B. Antonio, a Philippine developer who is collaborating with the Trumps on a tower in Manila and who in October was named a special envoy to the United States by the Philippine president, Rodrigo Duterte. The business partnership grew out of a friendship between Mr. Antonio’s son Robbie and Ms. Trump. Eric Trump is also listed on an advisory committee for one of the younger Mr. Antonio’s ventures: a company making luxury modular homes. Even nonbusiness expeditions have grown more tense since Election Day. Over Thanksgiving weekend, Donald Trump Jr. traveled to hunt wild goats in Turkey, where the elder Mr. Trump has “a little conflict of interest,” he acknowledged in a radio interview last year, because of “a major, major building in Istanbul” — actually twin Trump Towers. Security for the hunt was high, with private guards and Turkish intelligence officers, according to an official involved in the trip who was not authorized to discuss it. Long before their father’s election, the Trump children’s international trips often included audiences with heads of state. “Met with the president,” Donald Jr. said after an outing in Colombia, describing his work life as part of a Trump-branded video in 2011. “Did a bunch of other stuff.” At times, the president-elect has grown incredulous when pressed on the specter of conflicts. In an interview last month with The Times, he wondered aloud what harm might come from, say, taking a picture with business partners for a project his children were leading. He suggested some critics would prefer that he “never, ever see my daughter Ivanka again.” He allowed, though, that his election had changed at least one thing. “The brand is certainly a hotter brand than it was before,” he said. “I can’t help that, but I don’t care.” Image Ms. Trump and her brothers Donald Jr., center, and Eric in a construction elevator in New York in 2007. Credit Timothy A. Clary/Agence France-Presse — Getty Images Growing Up in the Business Grooming began early in the Trump family. For as long as they can remember, the children visited job sites, as Mr. Trump had done as a boy with his father, Fred. They sat in on meetings with executives and government officials, where, between fits of deal-making, Mr. Trump held forth on his daughter’s progress in school. They came to learn that the surest way to reach Mr. Trump was to call the office. “I always joke, I have been working in the company for 37 years,” Donald Jr. said in a Fox News special , “Meet the Trumps,” this year, “because we had that kind of level of access and because he was always there with us.” His first job , as a teenager, was at the Trump Castle marina in Atlantic City, where he earned minimum wage, plus tips, as a dock attendant. One of Ivanka Trump’s earliest architectural feats came when she was 6, according to family lore: She stole her younger brother’s Lego set, she recalled in 2007 , and built a model of Trump Tower in his room. Four days later, she said, her father scolded her — for rendering the structure with five setbacks instead of four. Despite this lengthy tutelage, Mr. Trump resisted a presidential run in 2012 in part because he did not believe his children were ready to succeed him. (The president-elect also has a daughter Tiffany, 23, from his second marriage, and a son Barron, 10, with his current wife, Melania.) While the eldest three have been presented, with Trumpian gusto, as business successes of the highest order, there have been some stumbles — cushioned often by the built-in advantages of being a Trump. The succession plan itself has not always been smooth. For a time, Donald Jr., who did not speak to his father for a year after his parents’ divorce, was ambivalent about joining the business, spending a year after college in Colorado working in a bar and hunting in his spare time. Since joining the Trump Organization in 2001, moving quickly to learn the intricacies of financing and construction, he has said repeatedly that he does not expect preferential treatment. “He puts on zero in the way of airs,” said Mel M. Immergut, a lawyer in New York who has long known the younger Mr. Trump and said he did not support the elder’s candidacy, or anyone else’s. The Array of Conflicts of Interest Facing the Trump Presidency Donald J. Trump’s global business empire will create an unprecedented number of conflicts of interest for a United States president, experts say. Dec. 1, 2016 But as Donald Jr. has sought to establish his own business identity, he has borrowed from his father’s playbook — and, occasionally, his payroll. He and Ivanka were paid speakers at a “creating wealth” forum that was described as free but featured event promoters seeking to enlist attendees for expensive courses on how to get rich. He has positioned himself as a spokesman for a hodgepodge of companies, including Cambridge Who’s Who, a publisher that produces a registry in which consumers pay to be listed. The younger Mr. Trump spoke about the company during interviews on Fox Business Network and TheStreet.com. Cambridge, which has drawn hundreds of complaints from customers who say they were misled by its promises, said it had benefited from its partnership with Donald Jr. through “leveraging relationships built by the Trump empire.” In 2011, Donald Jr. also became the public face of a Tulsa, Okla.-based company, MacroSolve, that primarily sued other companies, like Facebook and Walmart, over claims that they had infringed on its patent for a mobile device application. After several setbacks in court, the company has changed its focus. Yet it is his foray into South Carolina manufacturing that offers perhaps the most unfiltered view of Donald Jr.’s independent business dealings. Image Titan Atlas Manufacturing in North Charleston, S.C. When Donald Trump Jr.’s investment in the business faltered in recent years, leaving him personally responsible for a loan of more than $3 million, the Trump Organization helped bail him out. Credit Kate Thornton for The New York Times In 2010, the younger Mr. Trump helped found a company in the depressed suburb North Charleston called Titan Atlas Manufacturing, which made cast panels for prefabricated houses. Titan Atlas’s chief executive was an old friend named Jeremy Blackburn, who, before the company’s formation, acknowledged while settling a lawsuit that he had been part of a scheme to defraud a businessman who claimed he had lost $1 million. In an email, Mr. Blackburn said he had done nothing wrong. Along with the North Charleston project, Mr. Trump and Mr. Blackburn sought business deals in Mexico and Colombia, traveling with executives of the Trump Organization and Yun Capital, an investment firm involved in Trump Organization projects abroad. In 2011, Yun Capital registered the trademark JB Development on Mr. Blackburn’s behalf, filings show. By 2012, Titan Atlas was mired in debt, prompting a suit from a Philadelphia law firm it had hired to represent it. The firm claimed it was owed $400,000 in unpaid fees. After Mr. Blackburn filed for personal bankruptcy, the law firm turned its attention to Donald Jr., issuing a subpoena for him to testify about Titan Atlas’s assets. The Trump Organization jumped to his defense. In a letter on company letterhead, Alan Garten, the organization’s general counsel, threatened to file a disciplinary complaint about a lawyer at the firm if he sought to bring Donald Jr. into the case. The Trump Organization’s Defense of Donald Trump Jr. A letter from Alan Garten, the Trump Organization’s general counsel, threatened a disciplinary complaint about a lawyer seeking to question Donald Trump Jr. in a lawsuit. Dec. 4, 2016 In an interview, Mr. Garten said he had been “asked to assist” in resolving the matter even though it fell outside the purview of the Trump Organization. “If Don makes an investment in a company and legal assistance is needed, I’m happy to get involved,” Mr. Garten said, adding, “I have always viewed my role as representing not just the company but its principals.” The firm in Philadelphia pressed ahead with its suit despite the threat. On the eve of Donald Jr.’s testimony, though, a confidential settlement was reached. Separately, in late 2014, the Trump Organization formed an entity that took over a $3.65 million loan made by Deutsche Bank in 2011 to Titan Atlas. The younger Mr. Trump had been a co-signer on the loan. A spokeswoman for Deutsche Bank, which is a major lender to the Trump Organization, declined to disclose the details of that transaction. Mr. Garten described Donald Jr. as a “passive” investor in Titan Atlas. Asked why the Trump Organization had taken over an unrelated business loan to the younger Mr. Trump, Mr. Garten said he “can’t speak to that.” “This was an investment made by Don,” Mr. Garten said. “Ultimately, it was not successful.” Image Ms. Trump and her father placed their hands in concrete during a 2008 ceremony for the Trump International Hotel and Tower in Chicago. Credit Charles Rex Arbogast/Associated Press Lifting a Brand of Her Own The siblings occupy neighboring offices on Trump Tower’s 25th floor, one level below their father. They often gather for a breakfast meeting at the Trump Grill. They hold equivalent titles at the Trump Organization. There is little doubt, though, whom Mr. Trump admires most. Ivanka Trump was often her father’s most potent surrogate during the campaign, an essential bridge to female voters who might have been dismayed by Mr. Trump’s disparaging comments about women and the allegations of sexual assault against him. Ms. Trump’s image as a stylish businesswoman, and now mother, has long lifted her brand, steering Ivanka Trump products into stores from Alabama to Kuwait and establishing her as the second-most famous Trump. Department stores throughout the country sell Ivanka Trump shoes, Ivanka Trump clothes, Ivanka Trump handbags. She has traveled widely — sometimes with her father or brothers, often without them — as a fresher face of the family brand, at times convening with foreign dignitaries: an adviser to the Ukrainian president; a governor of Rio de Janeiro; Queen Rania of Jordan. Often wearing the kinds of heels and sheath dresses sold under her name, Ms. Trump stars in an impeccably curated Instagram feed, filled with product placement, pictures of her children and the promotion of a hashtag: #womenwhowork. With Mr. Trump’s election, at least one licensing partner quickly sensed an opportunity. After Ms. Trump appeared with her father on CBS’s “60 Minutes,” reporters received an email promoting the bracelet she had worn on the program: a $10,800 bangle from her own line. Amid criticism that Ms. Trump was using her father’s victory for financial gain, her company announced that it was “proactively discussing new policies and procedures.” Ms. Trump has also said she will separate her personal Twitter and Instagram accounts from those of her brand, which she wholly owns. Given its international renown, that brand is likely to flourish under a Trump administration regardless of social media strategy. In 2013, before the debut of a major clothing partnership, about $75 million worth of handbags, shoes and other products bearing Ms. Trump’s name sold at wholesale, according to a company document reviewed by The Times. Of that, Ms. Trump’s company would have received roughly $4 million to $6 million, according to people familiar with the business’s financial data who were not authorized to speak publicly. The company declined to comment on the figures but pointed to public statements from G-iii, the company that makes Ivanka Trump clothing, which estimated the line’s revenue at $100 million in the past fiscal year. In Japan, where news of her inclusion in the meeting with Mr. Abe inspired a media frenzy, she has become an object of intrigue for her glamorous image and powerful position in the Trump orbit. Japanese news reports often refer to her as Mr. Trump’s “beloved” and “beautiful” daughter. The expected deal with Sanei, the Japanese apparel company, is the result of a longstanding relationship between Sanei and Abigail Klem, an executive for Ms. Trump’s company who previously worked for Diane von Furstenberg, a label that Sanei licenses in Japan, according to Ms. Trump’s team. Her company said the terms of the agreement had been decided before the election. To date, Ivanka Trump apparel and jewelry have been available to Japanese shoppers through a small number of independent import sites. One of them, waja.co.jp, has reported a 28-fold increase in sales since the election, according to the local news media. On the home front, one of Ms. Trump’s ventures was less successful. Image Ivanka Trump Fine Jewelry opened on Madison Avenue in New York in 2007. The store, which had legal troubles, later moved to SoHo and closed without fanfare. Credit John Marshall Mantel for The New York Times In 2007, Ms. Trump opened Ivanka Trump Fine Jewelry on Madison Avenue, a short walk from Trump Tower. Her brothers had offered guidance, at least briefly, during a tour before the opening, flagging a structural misalignment in a bathroom. Like many other Trump family endeavors, the jewelry business was a licensing deal. Rings and necklaces in the Ivanka Trump line came through a partnership with a diamond wholesaler based in New York. In 2011, as Ms. Trump’s store migrated to a space in SoHo, troubles mounted. Ms. Trump’s partner, Madison Avenue Diamonds, which operated Ivanka Trump Fine Jewelry, was sued by a former supplier, KGK, which claimed to be owed more than $2 million. The partner’s lawyers accused KGK of incorporating fake stones into Trump-branded jewelry, saying that some gold pieces had “at times turned wearers’ skin green.” By the time the problem was discovered, the lawyers wrote, Ivanka Trump Fine Jewelry had already sold 119 of the more than 250 problematic pieces, “potentially creating a public relations disaster” that would endanger the business. KGK won its suit for reasons unrelated to the stones, whose authenticity was never proved or disproved in court. The supplier denied the allegations in court documents. Y. David Scharf, a lawyer for Madison Avenue Diamonds, said that “extensive efforts were taken to remove the nonconforming items from the market” and that all requests for exchanges had been honored. There was an attempt to contact anyone who had purchased the products in question, Mr. Scharf added, but not every customer could be reached. The licensing arrangement has allowed Ms. Trump to maintain a safe distance from any turmoil, and Ivanka Trump jewelry is still sold worldwide. But the SoHo store closed without fanfare last year. Image The Trump Winery in Charlottesville, Va., which has won local acclaim for its sparkling and still wines, is overseen by Eric Trump. Credit Steve Helber/Associated Press ‘We Made It Great Again’ There is not, at least so far, much of an Eric Trump brand to license. By most accounts, though, the youngest child of Donald J. Trump and Ivana Trump has been an effective steward of the Trump Winery in Virginia, which has won local acclaim for its sparkling and still wines. Eric Trump, who oversees the family’s golf courses, has also shown that he is comfortable with conflict. Shortly after the Trump Organization bought a luxury spa and golf course in Jupiter, Fla., in 2012, some club members filed a lawsuit claiming that the company had violated their rights by barring them from the facility, among other matters. The Trump Organization has said it did nothing wrong, and the case remains undecided. The legal dispute centered on the contracts signed by members with the Jupiter facility’s previous owner, Ritz-Carlton. To join, members paid initiation fees ranging from $35,000 to $210,000, deposits that were refundable when they resigned. But that process could take years, and under Ritz-Carlton rules, those on the resignation list could still use the club if they paid annual fees and other costs like food and beverage minimums. When the Trump Organization acquired the club, it also assumed liability for those refunds, a pool of deposits totaling $41 million. But the company was eager to convert deposits into cash that could be used to improve the club. Soon, a letter arrived, signed by Donald J. Trump. It offered to reduce members’ annual fees if they agreed to convert refundable deposits into nonrefundable ones and suggested that members who wanted to resign were “out.” “I do not want to them to utilize the club, nor do I want their dues,” the note read. But Mr. Trump testified in a deposition last year that although he had signed the letter, Eric Trump was in charge. “Eric is much more familiar with this club,” his father said. “He runs it.” Eric Trump contended in his pretrial testimony that members seeking to resign had been allowed to use the club so long as they paid annual dues. “The status quo was maintained,” he said in a 2015 deposition. Image Eric Trump before testifying in August in federal court in West Palm Beach, Fla. He acknowledged that his earlier statements about his family’s club in nearby Jupiter had been incorrect. Credit Lannis Waters/The Palm Beach Post During a two-day trial in August, he was forced to backtrack. Members and club employees testified that those on the resignation list had been barred from using the club even while they received bills. Presented with this evidence, Eric Trump acknowledged that his earlier statements had been mistaken. Juggling different policies at the family’s assorted clubs was difficult, he explained. But on balance, the younger Mr. Trump testified, the estate had thrived on the family’s watch. “We took something that had gone really bad,” he said, “and we made it great again.” Reporting was contributed by Susanne Craig, Michael Barbaro, Maggie Haberman, Steve Eder, Richard C. Paddock and Chris Dixon. Kitty Bennett, Doris Burke and Jeremy B. Merrill contributed research.  A version of this article appears in print on , on Page A 1 of the New York edition with the headline: Tangle Awaits 3 Trump Children Molded for Business Since Birth . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Related Coverage Will Ivanka Trump Be the Most Powerful First Daughter in History? Dec. 3, 2016 Image Potential Conflicts Around the Globe for Trump, the Businessman President Nov. 26, 2016 Image Ivanka Trump’s Presence at Meeting With Japan’s Leader Raises Questions Nov. 18, 2016 Image Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              