   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Book Review Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Nonfiction Risking Everything for Democracy Image Credit Alexey Furman/European Pressphoto Agency Buy Book ▾ Amazon Local Booksellers Barnes and Noble When you purchase an independently reviewed book through our site, we earn an affiliate commission. By  Rajan Menon Feb. 12, 2018 THE UKRAINIAN NIGHT An Intimate History of Revolution  By Marci Shore 290 pp. Yale University Press. $26 On Nov. 21, 2013, Viktor Yanukovych , Ukraine’s president, abruptly suspended long-running negotiations on an association agreement with the European Union. Though Yanukovych personified the corruption, cronyism and oligarchical capitalism rampant in Ukraine, he had previously promoted the accord, which many Ukrainians, particularly in the country’s center and west, anticipated as a pathway to a better life and communion with the West. Image Marci Shore Credit Rostyslav Kostenko Within hours, thanks to Facebook and Twitter, protesters thronged Kiev’s Independence Square (Maidan Nezalezhnosti). Once the riot police started beating demonstrators, and especially after the first fatalities, Yanukovych was doomed. By late February, he had fled. Moscow reacted by annexing the Crimea , Ukraine’s sole Russian-majority region, and supporting an armed insurgency in the Donbass (eastern Ukraine), which, compared with central and western Ukraine, has been shaped more by Russian culture and the Soviet past and contains many ethnic Russians, as well as Ukrainians whose primary language is Russian. The fighting has killed more than 10,000 people and placed a heavy economic burden on a country that can ill afford it. Though the Maidan movement cleared the way for the election of the current Ukrainian government, led by the tycoon Petro Poroshenko , the reformers within it face fierce resistance from the beneficiaries of corruption and oligarchy, some of whom are in the cabinet. The reforms have stalled , eroding public faith in Ukraine’s political institutions. The dreams that drove the uprising may yet be realized — or dashed, as happened after the 2004 Orange Revolution, whose failure enabled Yanukovych’s election in 2010. “The Ukrainian Night,” the Yale historian Marci Shore’s compact book (its large-font chapters typically range from two to seven pages), seeks to portray the ideals that animated the protesters. Shore succeeds admirably, particularly because she tells the story through their words. Her sympathy for their courage and her support for a democratic Ukraine aligned with the West are evident, her depictions of the sights, sounds and smells on the Maidan superb. In lucid, if occasionally overwrought, prose she draws evocative portraits of people who braved the bitter cold — and truncheons and bullets — to create a “parallel polis” with barricades, soup kitchens, libraries, rock concerts, fiery speakers and solidarity among Ukrainians of disparate backgrounds. Image This is not a work of historical scholarship, nor is it comparable to the detailed eyewitness reportage of writers like Keith Gessen or Sophie Pinkham. Shore strides through centuries of Ukraine’s past, but the result verges on potted history: It offers little to readers familiar with Ukraine and not nearly enough for novices seeking to understand the stark cultural and political variations within the country or the complex forces that produced the Maidan revolution. Shore wishes to give the movement a human face, but she devotes so much space to people’s appearances, professions, families, ruminations and inner thoughts that her account resembles a collage of personalities. Shore does not dispute that Yanukovych was elected fairly in 2010 yet fails to explain how a crook and a thug (“hoodlum” is her apt description), who betrayed even the inhabitants of the Donbass, his political bastion, prevailed, or why he suddenly shelved the association agreement. Given her overwhelming focus on Kiev and parts west, she says little about those Ukrainians in Crimea and the Donbass who opposed the Maidan revolt. Generally, they are voiceless — spoken for by Shore herself, or by her pro-Maidan interlocutors (who tend to characterize them as troglodytes). The internal political differences produced by Ukraine’s history are obscured, or dismissed as backward when they do not align with the ideals of the Maidan. “The Ukrainian Night” vividly depicts life on the Maidan. It is less effective in uncovering Ukraine’s complexities and the roots of a still-unfinished revolution. Rajan Menon is a professor of international relations at City College/CUNY and the author, with Eugene B. Rumer, of “Conflict in Ukraine. ”  Follow New York Times Books on Facebook and Twitter , sign up for our newsletter or our literary calendar . And listen to us on the Book Review podcast . A version of this article appears in print on , on Page 15 of the Sunday Book Review with the headline: Revolution From the Inside . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Related Coverage Opinion Oleksandr Sushko Ukraine and the West Need Each Other Feb. 9, 2016 Shadowlands April 26, 2013 Image Opinion Mykola Riabchuk Ukraine, Not Ready for Divorce March 5, 2014 Opinion Mikheil Saakashvili Why Ukraine Is Losing the War on Corruption Nov. 16, 2016 Image Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              