   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Business Day Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Common Sense Goldman Sachs Completes Return From Wilderness to the White House Image Clockwise from top left: the Goldman Sachs alumni Stephen K. Bannon, Gary D. Cohn, Anthony Scaramucci and Steven T. Mnuchin (center, in the elevator). Credit Clockwise from top left: Stephen Crowley/The New York Times; Sam Hodgson for The New York Times; Drew Angerer/Getty Images; and Hillary Swift for The New York Times By  James B. Stewart Jan. 12, 2017 “Government Sachs” is back. After eight years in the political wilderness, its name synonymous with the supposedly undue and self-serving influence in Washington that brought us the financial crisis and the Wall Street bailout, Goldman Sachs is again making its presence felt. In the Trump administration, to an unprecedented degree, economic policy making is largely being handed over to people with Goldman ties. The Goldman alumni include Steven T. Mnuchin, the nominee for Treasury secretary ; Gary D. Cohn, tapped as director of the National Economic Council and White House adviser on economic policy; and Stephen K. Bannon, who was named chief White House strategist . Jay Clayton, named to head the Securities and Exchange Commission , is a Wall Street lawyer who has represented Goldman. This week President-elect Donald J. Trump hired Dina H. Powell , a Goldman partner who heads impact investing, as a White House adviser. Anthony Scaramucci, a Goldman alumnus (whom I spotlighted last week ), is on the Trump transition committee and is expected to be named to a White House position as well. And this after Mr. Trump campaigned against Wall Street, excoriated Senator Ted Cruz for his ties to Goldman, and castigated Hillary Clinton for giving paid speeches to big banks, Goldman among them. The Goldman influx has so far drawn little criticism, perhaps because worries about what once would have been deemed undue influence now mix with relief that there is some adult supervision in the executive branch. On balance, “it’s a plus,” Michael R. Bloomberg, the former New York City mayor who built his fortune on Wall Street, told me this week. “Whatever you may think of them individually, you can’t get to be a Goldman partner and survive if you’re stupid, lazy or unprofessional.” (Mr. Bloomberg is co-chairman of Goldman’s “10,000 Small Businesses” initiative, which provides support to fledgling entrepreneurs.) Whatever bricks Mr. Trump threw at Wall Street during the campaign, investors have cheered his victory, driving the stock market to new highs. And Goldman has been a particular beneficiary, with its shares gaining 35 percent since Election Day — the top-performing stock in the Dow Jones industrial average in that time. Mr. Trump, a spokeswoman of his told me, sees no contradiction here. There’s a difference between individuals who happen to have worked at Goldman Sachs, at some point in their careers, and Goldman Sachs itself. “He’s said from the beginning that he’ll hire the very best people for the job regardless of where they worked before, which is what he’s done throughout his career,” said the spokeswoman, Hope Hicks. While the firm’s influence in a Trump administration may reach a new apex, Goldman alumni have long been fixtures in both Republican and Democratic administrations. The Goldman legend Sidney J. Weinberg headed Franklin D. Roosevelt’s influential Business Advisory and Planning Council. Recent Treasury secretaries with Goldman roots include Robert E. Rubin, a former co-chairman, under Bill Clinton; and Henry M. Paulson Jr., a former chairman and chief executive, under George W. Bush. Even in the Obama administration, where a Goldman pedigree was something akin to a scarlet letter, Gary Gensler was credited with reviving a moribund Commodity Futures Trading Commission and might have been Treasury secretary had Mrs. Clinton won in November. Which raises the question: Why would such a disproportionate number of the “best people,” in Mr. Trump’s view, come from just one bank? After all, Goldman is hardly the only large bank, and it is also far from the biggest. It employs roughly 33,000 people; JPMorgan Chase’s work force is many times as large. Many point to a unique Goldman culture that has long encouraged public service and philanthropy as integral to its business model. Goldman “does seem to produce people who are very smart and have valuable experience,” Mr. Bloomberg said. “And they have a culture and a long tradition of leaving the firm for public service. The firm pushes them to do that.” Mr. Cohn would seem to be a good example. After 26 years at the firm, most recently as president and chief operating officer, he sought out Mr. Trump once it became clear that Goldman’s chief executive, Lloyd C. Blankfein, had no immediate plans to step down. Mr. Cohn would hardly seem an obvious choice for the Trump administration — he is a registered Democrat and had no past relationship with Mr. Trump. But he knew Jared Kushner, Mr. Trump’s son-in-law, and after several face-to-face meetings, Mr. Trump was won over by Mr. Cohn’s innovative ideas for financing infrastructure projects and his up-by-the-bootstraps biography: Mr. Cohn, the son of an Ohio electrician, overcame dyslexia and taught himself options trading before talking his way into a position at the New York Mercantile Exchange. (Mr. Cohn declined to comment.) Mr. Blankfein told me this week that public service is deeply embedded in Goldman’s culture. “When I became a partner in 1988, you were expected to manage your career so that when they wrote your obituary, no more than three paragraphs would be about Goldman Sachs,” he said. “Most people leave by age 48 or 50. By then you’ve made enough money. The expectation was you’d turn to philanthropy or government service.” He said the acculturation process begins in recruiting. “We tend to recruit people who are very public service-minded,” he said. “We want people who are interesting and have diverse interests, people you’d want to engage with. I’ve always been a proponent of a liberal arts education for undergraduates. To develop breadth, to be interesting to yourself and other people, take a lab course or read Shakespeare. Don’t become a human calculator.” While Goldman partners take pride in the good works of their colleagues and employees — and were badly stung by the questioning of their motives after the financial crisis — the emphasis on public service isn’t driven entirely by altruism. Goldman’s business model has traditionally stressed long-term relationships in both the private and public sectors. High-profile government service by its alumni has largely burnished the firm’s reputation within the business community and, accurately or not, enhanced the perception that Goldman partners are just a phone call away from the executive branch. Already, chief executives have been calling Goldman partners seeking access to Mr. Cohn and Mr. Mnuchin. Mr. Blankfein dismisses the notion that the firm has any undue influence in Washington. “It’s an imprimatur on our firm that we have such good people that the administration wants to hire them,” he said. “It pains me to lose some of them. But the perception that they’ll go to Washington and then favor us is false. The reverse is true. They’ll bend over backwards to avoid that. They’re not going to serve the interests of Goldman Sachs. They have their own careers and reputations to worry about.” Exhibit A in that regard may be Mr. Gensler, at the time the youngest person to be made partner at Goldman (when he was 30). Two liberal senators tried to block his nomination to head the Commodity Futures Trading Commission on the grounds that he was too close to Wall Street. But by the time he left the agency, it had filed a record number of cases against major Wall Street banks. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page B 1 of the New York edition with the headline: The Return of Goldman Sachs . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Related Coverage Another Goldman Executive Is Said to Be Going to Trump Administration Jan. 11, 2017 Image 1MDB Case Hangs Over Goldman Sachs as Investigators Dig for Answers Dec. 22, 2016 Image At Goldman, Top Departure Opens a Door for the Next Generation Dec. 14, 2016 Image The Guys From ‘Government Sachs’ Dec. 1, 2016 Image Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              