   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Reader Center Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by 11 of Our Best Weekend Reads By  Kaly Soto Nov. 18, 2017 So much great journalism, so little time. It’s a modern problem, but this is the weekend. Sit back, relax, get another cup of coffee and lose yourself in one, two or 11 great stories. ‘The Lion King’ Effect Image Credit Brinkhoff Mogenbur Over 20 years, hundreds of South African performers have joined the musical in cities around the globe, The New York Times theater reporter Michael Paulson writes. Many play Rafiki , often learning to sing in languages not their own. Here are some of their stories, laced with hope, tragedy, homesickness and triumph. Arts & Leisure Mother Knows Best Image Credit Eric Yahnker The Vanity Fair columnist James Wolcott looks at two portraits of modern matriarchy , reviewing Ivana Trump’s new book “Raising Trump” and “The Kardashians: An American Dream” by Jerry Oppenheimer. Book Review The Uncounted Image Credit Giles Price for The New York Times An on-the-ground investigation reveals that the United States-led battle against ISIS — hailed as the most precise air campaign in history — is killing far more Iraqi civilians than the coalition has acknowledged. The New York Times Magazine Battlefield New York Image Credit De Agostini Picture Library/Getty Images With old maps in one hand and Google Maps in the other, the author Russell Shorto roams across the city’s five boroughs, searching for remnants of the American Revolution. Travel My Thanksgiving Image Credit Melina Hammer for The New York Times Behind the collective feast and public ritual is a personal dimension: the holiday as each of us has lived it, laughed about it, imagined it or reinvented it. Nine accomplished writers, including Wesley Morris , Masha Gessen , Elliot Ackerman and Jessica B. Harris , share their stories of the holiday. And don’t forget to check out our feature The 400-Degree Thanksgiving , where Sam Sifton and Melissa Clark cook a feast in just eight hours. Food A Hedge Fund Manager’s Escape Plan Image Credit Aaron Vincent Elkaim for The New York Times Philip Baker admitted that he had defrauded his hedge fund clients. He was sentenced to 20 years in federal prison. Then he devised an escape plan . Business Sunday For the First Family of Pleasure Products, Toys Are Us Image Credit Graham Walzer for The New York Times Once sold in seedy bookstores, sex toys are now a chic, “Made in America” business , instilling customers with brand loyalty. Sunday Styles The Doyenne of DNA Says: Just Chillax With Your Ex Image Credit Peter Prato for The New York Times “If we’re going to live to 150 years, the reality that you’re going to be with one person for 100 years is low,” Anne Wojcicki, the founder of 23andMe, says . Sunday Styles Trillions of Flies Can’t All Be Bad Image Credit Natural History Museum, London The world’s flies do much more than annoy us. Pollinating plants, cleaning up carcasses, swabbing drains — they're part of every strand of the web of life . Science A Big N.F.L. Game Comes to Mexico City. These Guys Have It Covered. Image Credit Rebecca Blackwell/Associated Press The podcast Primero y Diez, or First and 10, exemplifies the passion for American football in Mexico and the kind of fans the league is cultivating. Sports Overnight in Walmart Parking Lots: Silence, Solace and Refuge Image Credit George Etheredge for The New York Times Walmart’s practice of letting people populate many of its parking lots has made the retail giant’s stores a reliable destination and a place where an informal culture emerges before and after dark. Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              