   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Politics Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Sessions Endures Repeated Attacks by Bending to the President’s Whims Image Attorney General Jeff Sessions as President Trump delivered remarks last month in New Hampshire. Credit Doug Mills/The New York Times By  Katie Benner April 9, 2018 WASHINGTON — Attorney General Jeff Sessions has become famous for his ability to weather blistering critiques from the White House like the one President Trump delivered Monday when he told reporters he wished he had “a different attorney general.” In response to repeated attacks from the president over his decision to recuse himself from the investigation into Russian interference in the 2016 election, Mr. Sessions has fallen into an uneasy pattern, enduring the humiliations with Job-like patience while responding with policies and pronouncements that seem meant to please his toughest critic. In the past month, Mr. Trump has publicly suggested putting drug dealers to death , said the government would ban so-called bump stocks and pushed for strict immigration controls. In response, Mr. Sessions issued a memo recommending use of the death penalty in drug cases whenever possible, reversed the department’s past decision on banning bump stocks and issued a memo outlining a “zero tolerance” policy on illegal immigration. “The president and his cabinet officials are supposed to be aligned on policy issues. That’s the government functioning normally,” said Jamil Jaffer, a law professor at George Mason University and a former associate White House counsel under President George W. Bush . “What is unusual here is the public back and forth between Trump and Sessions; for the president to take pot shots at his cabinet official and for him to have to publicly respond.” It happened again on Saturday, when the president accused the Justice Department of “slow walking” its response to a congressional inquiry into the F.B.I.’s handling of the Hillary Clinton email case. His disparaging tone was typical of how he treats the department led by a former senator from Alabama who was one of Mr. Trump’s earliest campaign supporters. “What does the Department of Justice and FBI have to hide? Why aren’t they giving the strongly requested documents (unredacted) to the HOUSE JUDICIARY COMMITTEE?” Mr. Trump wrote on Twitter . “Stalling, but for what reason? Not looking good!” Responding almost immediately, the Justice Department announced Sunday night that Mr. Sessions had asked John Lausch, a United States attorney in Illinois appointed by Mr. Trump, to oversee that document request and report directly to the attorney general. It is not unusual for the Justice Department to appoint someone to oversee an enormous document production task, as it did when Congress wanted reams of information related to the “Fast and Furious” scandal, in which government officials let guns fall into the hands of criminals. “But it’s wildly unparalleled for Justice Department officials to do so in response to presidential tweets that criticize them,” said Ronald Weich, the dean of the University of Baltimore’s law school and the former assistant attorney general for legislative affairs at the Justice Department. While Mr. Sessions’s quick responses to the president’s wishes have yet to lessen the pressures on either him or the Justice Department, as demonstrated by Mr. Trump’s outburst on Monday, some critics say they threaten to undermine the department. “It’s unseemly to have the president publicly direct the Justice Department, especially when he tries to control investigations,” said Paul Pelletier, a former chief of the Justice Department’s fraud section who is now a Democratic candidate for Congress in Virginia. “It’s an affront to the historic independence of the department that we’ve guarded since the Nixon administration. Without it, all Justice Department investigations will be subject to attack on a political basis.” Publicly, Mr. Sessions stands by the president, never failing to mention Mr. Trump in speeches and news releases. In announcing the bump stock ban, he thanked the president for his “courageous leadership.” In remarks to police chiefs in Nashville, he emphasized that both he and the president stand by law enforcement. In his statement on immigration reform, he praised the president’s plans. Privately, Mr. Sessions is aware that he has supporters at the Capitol and among former staff members, according to one person who has talked to the attorney general. While his friends worry that he could be fired, two of them say that the president’s attacks have made him more determined to remain on the job. Although Mr. Sessions has called the president the country’s chief law enforcement officer, a title that is generally conferred on the attorney general, Mr. Trump still believes Mr. Sessions is not loyal. Mr. Trump seemed to express that sense of betrayal again on Monday, when he said the “attorney general made a terrible mistake” when he recused himself, showing that he is still stung by a decision made more than a year ago, and despite all of the work that Mr. Sessions has done to support him policywise. “When he did this and when he recused himself,” Mr. Trump said, “We would have used a — put a different attorney general in. So he made what I consider to be a very terrible mistake for the country.” Sharon LaFraniere contributed reporting.  Get politics and Washington news updates via Facebook , Twitter and the Morning Briefing newsletter . A version of this article appears in print on , on Page A 16 of the New York edition with the headline: Sessions Endures Repeated Attacks by Bending to the President’s Whims . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              