   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Theater Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Critic's Notebook In a Summer Theater Weekend, Odd Couples and Immigrants on the Make Image S. Epatha Merkerson in “The Roommate,” by Jen Silverman, at the Williamstown Theater Festival. Credit Daniel Rader By  Jesse Green July 5, 2017 WILLIAMSTOWN, Mass. — A peculiar purple light native to the Berkshires casts a flattering glow on the valleys of Western Massachusetts. For me, the light of nostalgia also glows there. Decades ago, I was a flunky at the Williamstown Theater Festival , which I recall fondly even though I spent a lot of my time making French toast and getting yelled at. Flunkies at the festival today — they’re called apprentices — don’t get yelled at much. And their labor now supports a slate of productions whose technical polish and top-drawer casting often approach Broadway levels. Three plays I caught last weekend, here in Williamstown and 40 miles south in Stockbridge, were evidence that the straw-hat days of B-list performers and cardboard flats are long over, and even my memories of dusty classics earnestly revived need revamping. Still, the work produced in the country these days is not the same as what we usually see in the city: It is often more exploratory and more serendipitous. I doubt, for instance, that S. Epatha Merkerson and Jane Kaczmarek, fine stage actors rarely seen onstage anymore, could commit themselves to several months away from their television careers for a Manhattan run of an oddball two-hander like Jen Silverman’s “The Roommate.” But offer them the chance to do it in a bucolic setting for just a few weeks, and the calculus changes. As it happens, such chances and changes are the play’s subject. Sharon (Ms. Merkerson) is a sheltered 54-year-old Iowa divorcée without much to do and a large, empty house to do it in. Ms. Kaczmarek plays Robyn, a 56-year-old lesbian grifter and slam poet late of the Bronx. How the two become roommates is unclear, but Ms. Silverman, whose Brontë sisters takeoff, “ The Moors ,” was recently seen in New York, isn’t interested in the dull details of conventional storytelling. Instead she sets up a kind of chemistry experiment. Can two women of utterly different temperaments and backgrounds help each other? Can they help each other too much? What begins in meet-awkward sitcom mode thus moves quickly into “Thelma & Louise” territory. As Sharon becomes interested in spicing up her life with a little larceny, Robyn is torn between admiring her roommate’s emergent pluck and her own resolve to get off the grift. Ms. Merkerson, a hilarious prude at the start, blossoms beautifully, and the joy she gets in lifting a fancy wristwatch off a date is delicious. So, too, is Ms. Kaczmarek’s gradual awakening to the monster she has created. But the shift into surreal territory seems to strip a few gears, as the production, directed by Mike Donahue, doesn’t adequately change with the story. The intended effect is somewhat bewildering. Still, seeing it on a warm summer evening in the country invites a gentler, less ends-oriented kind of reflection. I found myself not so much annoyed by the artificial plot manipulations as grateful for a play that gives two noningénues such strange, meaty roles. The difficulties of “The Roommate” are in that sense opportunities. I had a similar reaction to Jason Kim’s “The Model American,” also at Williamstown. It begins with a moment of bracing disorientation: a monologue delivered almost entirely in Korean. That the character delivering it turns out to be only a minor participant in the action is one of the things about the play that strikes me as needing more thought. Still, it is effective at throwing the audience, most of which probably doesn’t speak Korean, right into the midst of the story’s concerns about immigration and otherness. When it sticks to those themes, “The Model American” is a strong new work, bracingly imagined and keenly playable. Gabriel (Hiram Delgado) is a gay Latino immigrant who has come to America from an unspecified birthplace with dreams of getting rich in the “greatest country on earth to do business.” Though he lives in a homeless shelter in Queens as the play starts, his intelligence and moxie — along with some judicious prevarication — soon get him a “white knight” boyfriend and an entry-level job at an e-tail start-up. Like many recent plays, this one is structured as a series of scenes that keep branching out and introducing new characters. We meet Gabriel’s boss, an idealist with a cocaine habit, and then the boss’s sister, a recovering addict. Other offshoots bring us the boyfriend who is clueless of his privilege (Micah Stock), the Korean friend whose monologue opens the play (Han Jonghoon), and a corporate shark (Laila Robins) with a less idealistic vision for the future of the start-up. But when the time comes to start corralling all these stories, Mr. Kim is too far out on their many limbs to get back. The second half of the play, in which fights over the direction of the business dominate — and larger questions about American values are rushed into position — disappoints. Even so, “The Model American” is filled with moments that are refreshing and smart, and with acting (under the direction of Danny Sharron) that is excellent whenever those moments allow. I particularly enjoyed getting to know the work of Maurice Jones as the boss, Sheria Irving as his sister and, especially, Mr. Delgado, an M.F.A. student at New York University making a terrific first impression. Mr. Delgado isn’t even a member of Actors’ Equity yet; Williamstown and other summer theaters have traditionally helped young performers earn professional credits so they can join the union. More recently, these theaters have also served as tryout opportunities for producers of shows aiming for New York. Williamstown helped nurture “ The Bridges of Madison County ” and “ Cost of Living ”; Barrington Stage Company , in Pittsfield, developed “ The 25th Annual Putnam County Spelling Bee ” and “ On the Town .” Image Joshua Jackson and Lauren Ridloff in “Children of a Lesser God,” at the Berkshire Theater Group in Stockbridge, Mass. Credit Matthew Murphy To those, add the Berkshire Theater Group , which is now hosting a pre-Broadway tryout of “Children of a Lesser God” at its Fitzpatrick Main Stage in Stockbridge. Mark Medoff’s play, which opened on Broadway in 1980 and was made into a movie in 1986, might not seem a likely candidate for revival today. Something creaky and possibly icky adheres to its story of the romance between Sarah, a ferocious young deaf woman who defends the dignity of sign language, and James, the glib speech therapist who tries to bulldoze her into lip-reading and spoken English. But even as the play’s sexual politics rankle, its deaf politics remain thrilling, and the production, directed by Kenny Leon, makes smart choices to accentuate that. The most important, of course, is the casting of the leads. Joshua Jackson, best known for television work including “ The Affair ,” is a revelation in the tour de force role of James, ably blending the character’s smugness with real charm and a sense that his good intentions are being undermined by ideas he doesn’t understand. And Lauren Ridloff, a former Miss Deaf America , is a sensational find, her signing so explosive we barely need the translations. She’d make a great Ibsen heroine. That she is black is another plus, creating a kind of racial descant to the play’s main theme of hearing and deafness. In his work with the actors, Mr. Leon emphasizes the moments when that melody and countermelody intersect in questions of privilege and prejudice, even among lovers. I wish his staging — on an abstract Derek McLane set — were as nimble and captivating, but if the production moves forward there should be time to fix that. I’m glad I caught it now. Theater weekends in the Berkshires often accumulate an inadvertent theme, and on this trip the theme was crystallized for me by “Children of a Lesser God.” Like “The Model American,” it begins with a disorienting speech in a foreign language — ASL. “The Roommate” likewise asked its audience to look at the experience of otherness from a new perspective. The question on the summer’s mind seemed to be: How do we get past our limitations, whichever side of whichever divides we live on? Or perhaps that was not just a question for the summer. The Roommate Through July 16 The Model American Through Sunday, both at Williamstown Theater Festival, Williamstown, Mass.; 413-458-3253, wtfestival.org. Children of a Lesser God Through July 22 at the Berkshire Theater Group, Stockbridge, Mass.; 413-997-4444, berkshiretheatregroup.org.  A version of this article appears in print on , on Page C 1 of the New York edition with the headline: A Summer Weekend  Of Odd Couples . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Related Coverage ‘Children of a Lesser God’ to Return to Broadway Sept. 29, 2014 Image Joshua Jackson of ‘The Affair’: An Unlikely Fashion Guy Oct. 2, 2015 Image Review: In ‘The Moors,’ Where Heathcliff Fears to Tread March 13, 2017 Image Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              