   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Briefing Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Mueller, Facebook, Mars: Your Tuesday Evening Briefing By  Karen Zraick and David Scull May 1, 2018 (Want to get this briefing by email? Here’s the sign-up .) Good evening. Here’s the latest. Image Credit Melissa Lyttle for The New York Times 1. “This is about health, it’s about life and death.” That was Gov. Jerry Brown of California, announcing a lawsuit against the Trump administration over car emissions rules . Above, an interchange in Los Angeles. California is leading a coalition of 17 other states and the District of Columbia in the suit, arguing that the Environmental Protection Agency’s effort to weaken auto emissions rules is unlawful. They’re also accusing the agency of violating the Clean Air Act. The suit brings the American auto industry closer to a split into two markets, an outcome automakers are scrambling to avert. _____ Image Credit Doug Mills/The New York Times 2. President Trump responded to our publication of more than 40 questions the special counsel, Robert Mueller, would like to ask him. He said it was “disgraceful” that the questions had been “leaked.” The special counsel’s investigators read the questions to Mr. Trump’s lawyers in March, and they wrote them down. That list was provided to The Times by a person outside the president’s legal team. Here they are , with our notes about what they tell us about Mr. Mueller’s inquiry into Russian influence on the 2016 presidential election and other matters. The reporter who obtained the list discusses what they mean on our news podcast, “The Daily.” _____ Image Credit Scott Camazine/Science Source 3. Warmer weather’s here. Get out the sunblock, and the bug repellent. Federal health officials announced that the number of people who get diseases transmitted by mosquito, tick and flea bites has more than tripled in the U.S. in recent years. Experts say there are probably many reasons, including ticks, like the ones above, thriving in areas that used to be too cold for them. Here’s how to protect yourself. _____ Image Credit Stephen Lam/Reuters 4. Big tech news today: Apple announced an enormous stock buyback as it reported quarterly earnings, saying it would return $100 billion to shareholders. The buyback fits into the trend of companies using the windfall from the new tax law to reward shareholders. And Facebook held its annual developers’ conference. Its chief executive, Mark Zuckerberg, announced a new privacy control that will allow users to erase their history, similar to the way you might clear your web browser. The company’s new privacy changes have become a financial nightmare for companies and programmers whose businesses relied on access to the social network’s user data . _____ Image Credit Prince Williams/WireImage, via Getty Images 5. The #MeToo movement may finally be catching up to R. Kelly, the multiplatinum R&B idol repeatedly accused of sexual misconduct. Ten of his concerts have been canceled since a celebrity-endorsed grass-roots protest campaign called #MuteRKelly began last summer. And this week, the Time’s Up organization released an open letter calling on corporations tied to Mr. Kelly to cut him off. Representatives for Mr. Kelly called the campaign “a greedy, conscious and malicious conspiracy to demean him” and “an attempted public lynching.” _____ Image Credit Min Heo 6. What was your previous salary? If you’re a woman, that question in a job interview may simply preserve the persistent gender wage gap. So some states, cities and companies are banning it , including Massachusetts, California, New York City, Philadelphia and Chicago, as well as Amazon, Google and Starbucks. _____ Image Credit Sara Krulwich/The New York Times 7. The musicals “Mean Girls” and “SpongeBob SquarePants,” above, led the pack in this year’s Tony Award nominations , garnering 12 nods each. Revivals of “Angels in America” and “Carousel,” as well as the new musical “The Band’s Visit,” got 11 nominations apiece, while the new play “Harry Potter and the Cursed Child” and the revival of “My Fair Lady” each got 10. But our critics noted that it was a very slim Broadway season . The awards ceremony will take place on June 10 at Radio City Music Hall and be broadcast on CBS. _____ Image Credit Steve Meddle/REX, via Shutterstock 8. Only one reporter, yet to be determined, will be allowed into St. George’s Chapel for the wedding of Prince Harry and Meghan Markle on May 19. Our correspondent in London says the restricted access is proof of a sea change in the historically symbiotic relations between the royal family and England’s infamous tabloids . Harry and his brother, Prince William, harbor a deep mistrust of the paparazzi, who were pursuing their mother when she was killed in a car crash. And some tabloids have published acid-tongued criticism of Ms. Markle. “The boys are taking control,” said a photographer who’s covered the royals for decades. _____ Image 9. NASA’s InSight spacecraft,  scheduled to launch on Saturday , aims to discover the red planet’s deep interior, and will be listening intently for “marsquakes.” Since there was not much interest in what the craft will find at the surface, a safe — that is, flat — landing spot was selected. (“Kansas without the corn” is how a mission scientist described it.) Explore the history of the many missions to Mars here (and if you’re on a smartphone, you’ll get the augmented-reality version). _____ Image Credit Lloyd Bishop/NBC 10. Finally, the comedian Michelle Wolf has worked on both “The Daily Show” and “Late Night,” and Trevor Noah and Seth Meyers defended her controversial remarks at the White House correspondents’ dinner on Saturday. (Above, Ms. Wolf and Mr. Meyers last year.) “Michelle should have had the decency not to comment on women’s appearances in any way, shape or form,” Mr. Noah deadpanned. “She’s a comedian, for God’s sake, not the president.” And our chief TV critic weighed in , arguing that the problem wasn’t Ms. Wolf’s performance, but rather the event itself, which he called “a multicourse tasting menu of mixed messages.” Have a great night. _____ Your Evening Briefing is posted at 6 p.m. Eastern. And don’t miss Your Morning Briefing. Sign up here to get it by email in the Australian, Asian, European or American morning. Want to catch up on past briefings? You can browse them here . What did you like? What do you want to see here? Let us know at briefing@nytimes.com . Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              