   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index New York Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Fox News Sidelines Andrew Napolitano After Wiretap Allegation Image Andrew Napolitano at Trump Tower in 2016. Credit Jim Watson/Agence France-Presse — Getty Images By  John Koblin March 21, 2017 Andrew Napolitano, the senior legal analyst for Fox News, has been temporarily sidelined following his unproved assertion last week that former President Barack Obama had asked for British assistance in spying on Donald J. Trump, a person briefed on the decision said on Monday. Mr. Napolitano did not appear on Fox on Monday, even though there were two news events that normally would have called for his services: hearings involving the F.B.I. director James B. Comey, and the Supreme Court nominee Neil M. Gorsuch. Mr. Comey’s hearing touched on Judge Napolitano’s allegation — which both President Trump and his press secretary, Sean Spicer, repeated — that British intelligence officers wiretapped Mr. Trump at Mr. Obama’s request. It is not clear how long Mr. Napolitano will be off the air, but his absence from Fox’s airwaves on Monday was an indication that the network was not pleased with the unwanted attention focused on his unfounded allegations. The Los Angeles Times reported Mr. Napolitano’s absence on Monday. Fox News declined to comment. Last week, Mr. Napolitano, a former New Jersey Superior Court judge, reported on the morning show “Fox and Friends” that the Obama administration had asked British intelligence to wiretap Mr. Trump during the 2016 presidential campaign. The claim was forgotten nearly as quickly as it was stated until Mr. Spicer repeated it in a news briefing later in the week. Mr. Trump then brought it up again on Friday, saying, “All we did was quote a very talented legal mind.” Fox was then put into the awkward position of denouncing Mr. Napolitano’s allegation, with the daytime anchor Shepard Smith saying on Friday: “Fox News cannot confirm Judge Napolitano’s commentary. Fox News knows of no evidence of any kind that the now-president of the United States was surveilled at any time, any way. Full stop.” During a congressional hearing on Monday, Mr. Comey said there was no evidence that Mr. Obama had wiretapped Mr. Trump. And Adm. Michael S. Rogers, the director of the National Security Agency, said at the same hearing that there was no evidence that the British had been asked to intercept conversations, as Mr. Napolitano had asserted. It is not known whether Mr. Napolitano’s future at Fox News has been thrown into doubt, or whether network executives are simply trying to remove him from the current news cycle. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page B 4 of the New York edition with the headline: Fox Sidelines Legal Analyst After Wiretap Allegation . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Related Coverage F.B.I. Is Investigating Trump’s Russia Ties, Comey Confirms March 20, 2017 Image Fox’s Andrew Napolitano Stirred the Pot for Trump’s British Tempest March 17, 2017 Image Trump Offers No Apology for Claim on British Spying March 17, 2017 Image Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              