   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index New York Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by About New York He Sent de Blasio 2 Dozen Letters. He Got Zero Replies. Image Wallace Cheatham said Bill de Blasio had once favored the naming of a public building for Benjamin Ward, the city’s first black police commissioner. Credit Danny Ghitis for The New York Times By  Jim Dwyer Feb. 14, 2017 As soon as Bill de Blasio was elected mayor, Wallace Cheatham figured that a cause he had long championed — the creation of a permanent, prominent honor for the city’s first black police commissioner — would be quickly approved. After all, Mr. de Blasio, in his previous job as the city’s public advocate, had told Mr. Cheatham that he favored the idea of naming a public building for the commissioner, Benjamin Ward , who also ran the city jails and state prisons. “When he was elected mayor, I thought, ‘This is a slam dunk,’” Mr. Cheatham said. “I gave him six months and I wrote a letter. No response. Wrote another letter, no response.” Three years have passed, with two dozen letters, and Mr. Cheatham says he has not heard yes, no, or we’re thinking about it. “It’s at the point where the failure to respond is the issue,” Mr. Cheatham said. This is the story of a citizen who says he can’t get City Hall to pay attention, or even pretend to. “‘Don’t call me, I’ll call you’ — I never even got that,” Mr. Cheatham said. Image Mayor Edward I. Koch in 1983, announcing the appointment of Mr. Ward as the city’s police commissioner. Credit Don Hogan Charles/The New York Times It is a peculiar breach of history. Many New York mayors have been devoted correspondents. “You are evidently a dishonest scamp, but I acknowledge the receipt of all letters,” wrote Mayor William J. Gaynor, who served from January 1910 until his death in September 1913. He wrote thousands of letters and was criticized for “ government by epistle .” Edward I. Koch, mayor from 1978 through 1989, once said: “I have a rule, and I’ve had it ever since I’ve been in public office. Every letter that you get, no matter how wacky, no matter how insulting, must be responded to.” If proof were needed, he published a collection of his letters. When the book was announced, the Newsday columnist Dennis Duggan wrote, “Judging by just the letters Hizzoner has sent me, he will have no problem filling a volume the size of the Book of Kells.” Staff members presented Rudolph W. Giuliani with a selection of the 300 to 400 letters that arrived every day. A boy in Queens suggested that the city could stop the spread of mosquitoes that carry encephalitis by releasing thousands of spiders around the city. The correspondence office had some form response letters on file, the mayor’s name signed by a felt-tipped pen in a signature machine. Michael R. Bloomberg used to hand out business cards with his phone number and private email, and was known occasionally to take calls from the public at City Hall when others were not around. During President Barack Obama’s time in the White House, when about 10,000 letters and emails arrived daily, the president was given 10 letters a day to take to the family residence and read in the evening. Image Mr. Cheatham with some of the letters and documents he has sent to Mayor Bill de Blasio and other officials, proposing that Mr. Ward be honored. Credit Danny Ghitis for The New York Times Mr. Cheatham, who was president of the city probation officers union for eight years, said that he was prompted to propose an honor for Mr. Ward when the name of one of his successors, Bernard B. Kerik, was removed from two jail buildings. Mayor Giuliani named them for Mr. Kerik in 2001. Mayor Bloomberg unnamed them one night in 2006 after Mr. Kerik pleaded guilty to misdemeanors for accepting home renovations from a contractor. “It just hit me: Benjamin Ward had a résumé 40 times better than Bernard Kerik,” Mr. Cheatham said. He proposed that either the former Kerik jail or Police Headquarters be named for Mr. Ward. Mr. Cheatham rounded up support from prominent officials and former officials, including Mr. de Blasio when he was the public advocate, and wrote to the mayor. “Mr. Bloomberg turned it down,” Mr. Cheatham said. “At least it was a response.” He has become incensed by the lack of an answer from the de Blasio administration. “To me, it’s fundamental. It goes to the essence of a so-called democracy.” Raul A. Contreras, a spokesman for the mayor, said a reception area on Rikers Island had been named for Mr. Ward. He also said that he believed some officials had spoken directly with Mr. Cheatham. (“Baloney,” Mr. Cheatham said.) The mayor’s office gets about 1,200 letters and emails a week, Mr. Contreras said, and they are sent to agencies that can answer them. A few reach the mayor. Mr. Contreras said the city was trying to figure out what had become of the Cheatham correspondence. “I am respectful of the job — he is covering a lot of bases,” Mr. Cheatham said. “I think after three years someone in his administration could write a response. Even if it’s not a response you want.” Email: dwyer@nytimes.com Twitter: @jimdwyernyt Alain Delaquérière contributed research.  A version of this article appears in print on , on Page A 22 of the New York edition with the headline: Two Dozen Letters, No Response: Silence Greets Requests to Honor Police Official . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              