   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Politics Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Trump Deletes Tweets Supporting Luther Strange Image President Trump embraced Senator Luther Strange during a rally in Huntsville, Ala., on Friday. Mr. Strange was the first candidate endorsed by the president to lose an election since Mr. Trump took office. Credit Tom Brenner/The New York Times By  Russell Goldman Sept. 27, 2017 After enthusiastically endorsing an Alabama senator’s campaign for re-election, President Trump distanced himself on Tuesday night from the candidate’s loss in the most Trumpian way possible: He deleted his supportive tweets. Hours after Senator Luther Strange, a Republican from Alabama, lost in Tuesday’s primary runoff , Mr. Trump excised at least three favorable Twitter posts, including one sent Tuesday morning. In that tweet, posted as the polls in Alabama opened, the president boasted that Mr. Strange “has been shooting up in the Alabama polls since my endorsement.” Mr. Strange, who was appointed to the Senate early this year after Jeff Sessions vacated his seat to become attorney general under Mr. Trump, conceded on Tuesday night to Roy S. Moore, a former Alabama Supreme Court justice whose candidacy was opposed by leading establishment Republicans. The deleted tweets were archived by ProPublica , a nonprofit journalism website, but are no longer public on Twitter, feeding into an intriguing legal debate about whether Mr. Trump is breaking the law when he expunges his tweets. Mr. Trump and Vice President Mike Pence visited Alabama on Friday to attend a rally for Mr. Strange. The closely watched campaign was seen by many as a barometer of Mr. Trump’s political sway. Mr. Strange was the first candidate endorsed by the president to lose an election since Mr. Trump took office. Around the same time the president was deleting tweets about Mr. Strange, he also deleted a tweet congratulating Mr. Moore on his victory. He later reposted that message, and early Wednesday he tweeted about speaking with Mr. Moore by telephone. It is unclear why the president chose to delete the tweets he did. Several tweets endorsing Mr. Strange, whom the president often called “Big Luther,” but which were sent in the weeks before Mr. Trump’s visit to Alabama, remain public. At a rally for Mr. Strange in Alabama on Friday, Mr. Trump openly wondered whether it was a mistake to campaign for the senator, given his flagging poll numbers. Even after getting elected president, Mr. Trump has maintained personal control of his Twitter account. He has used his posts to skewer opponents, respond to critics and, he says, to communicate directly to voters without the filter of the news media. “Twitter is a wonderful thing for me, because I get the word out,” he said in a March interview with Fox News. “I might not be here talking to you right now as president if I didn’t have an honest way of getting the word out.” But if the president’s tweets are the Digital Age version of quips at the Rose Garden podium, what then are we to make of the deletions? The president regularly deletes tweets with typos and misspellings . Less frequently, but not unheard-of, are erasures that pertain to more significant topics. In March, he posted and deleted a tweet that read: “Meeting with Generals at Mar-a-Lago in Florida. Very interesting!” At least two government watchdog groups, Citizens for Responsibility and Ethics in Washington and the National Security Archive, believe that when Mr. Trump deletes a tweet he may be breaking the law. The groups filed a lawsuit in June against Mr. Trump and the Executive Office of the President, claiming that deleting social media posts violates the Presidential Records Act, a law that requires presidential communications to be archived. The groups are also suing to require White House staff members to archive material sent through encrypted messaging apps, such as WhatsApp and Signal. Related Coverage What’s a ‘Covfefe’? Trump Tweet Unites a Bewildered Nation May 31, 2017 Image Roy Moore Wins Senate G.O.P. Runoff in Alabama Sept. 26, 2017 Image Alabama Republicans Bet on Roy Moore, a Familiar Rebel, for Senate Sept. 27, 2017 Image Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              