   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Politics Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Trump Attacks Obama, and His Own Attorney General, Over Russia Inquiry Image Attorney General Jeff Sessions recused himself from the Russia investigation last year. Credit Tom Brenner/The New York Times By  Eileen Sullivan Feb. 21, 2018 WASHINGTON — President Trump attacked his own attorney general on Wednesday, asking in a Twitter post why Jeff Sessions has not been investigating Democrats for Russian interference in the 2016 election. Question: If all of the Russian meddling took place during the Obama Administration, right up to January 20th, why aren’t they the subject of the investigation? Why didn’t Obama do something about the meddling? Why aren’t Dem crimes under investigation? Ask Jeff Sessions! — Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) February 21, 2018  In his tweet, Mr. Trump revived his offensive on Mr. Sessions, whom he once called “beleaguered,” and continued his days-long Twitter comments on the ongoing special counsel’s investigation into Russian meddling . It was the latest instance of the president publicly criticizing federal law enforcement. Mr. Trump has been questioning why the Obama administration did not do more to stop Russian interference, and he has said that his administration has been tougher on Russia than that of his predecessor. “Why aren’t they the subject of the investigation?” Mr. Trump asked. The president regularly uses Twitter to question why the Justice Department is not investigating his political opponents. Mr. Trump has denied that Russia was involved in the 2016 election meddling. But an indictment announced last week against 13 Russians and three companies described a sophisticated, multiyear Russian influence campaign designed to sow discord across the American democratic process. On Tuesday, the special counsel, Robert S. Mueller III, announced charges against the 19th person in the sprawling probe that has dogged Mr. Trump’s presidency. Mr. Trump does not think Mr. Sessions — one of his earliest supporters — has done enough to protect him from the Russia probe. The president has publicly said he never would have hired Mr. Sessions if he knew the attorney general would recuse himself from the Russia investigation. The attorney general’s recusal last year was the first in a series of steps that led to Mr. Mueller’s appointment . Mr. Trump had once considered firing Mr. Mueller , but he backed down after the objection of a senior adviser. In recent months, Mr. Trump has become more critical of federal law enforcement and has called senior officials at the F.B.I. biased against him. Related Coverage Trump Tries to Shift Blame to Obama for Not Countering Russian Meddling Feb. 20, 2018 Image Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              