   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Middle East Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Trusted Netanyahu Adviser Caught Up in Corruption Inquiry By  David M. Halbfinger Nov. 7, 2017 JERUSALEM — The corruption investigations closing in on Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu of Israel had caught up his wife, his personal lawyer, a former chief of staff and other close confidants — nearly all of them, it seemed, save one: Yitzhak Molho, the lifelong friend Mr. Netanyahu has relied upon to negotiate with the Palestinians, sent on secret diplomatic missions and turned to on sensitive matters since the 1990s. So much for that. The police confirmed on Tuesday that Mr. Molho, the 72-year-old managing partner of one of Jerusalem’s leading law firms and chairman of the Israel Museum, had been detained for questioning in perhaps the weightiest of the investigations underway: an expanding inquiry into the circumstances surrounding the multibillion-dollar purchase of three new submarines from a German shipbuilding company. Israeli news reports, citing unnamed sources, said Mr. Molho was suspected of a conflict of interest and breach of trust. To some who have negotiated with him, Mr. Molho’s interrogation, disclosed after the expiration of a 48-hour court-imposed gag order, was baffling. “Hard to fathom,” Dennis B. Ross, the former United States Middle East envoy, wrote in an email. Saying he had worked closely with Mr. Molho for 20 years and found him “careful and meticulous and always ethical,” Mr. Ross added: “I doubt there is anything that actually touches him.” But to critics of Mr. Netanyahu, Mr. Molho’s detention on Sunday along with that of David Shimron , a partner in his law firm who previously had been named as a suspect in the submarine investigation, highlighted a glaring, longstanding problem in the way the prime minister has run his government: The two men were perhaps his most trusted advisers, yet neither had given up private law practice — leading, at a minimum, to the appearance of a conflict of interest. Personal interests are inextricable when it comes to Mr. Molho, Mr. Shimron and Mr. Netanyahu: Mr. Shimron, who has helped Mr. Netanyahu negotiate to form a governing coalition, is a cousin of the prime minister’s. Mr. Molho is married to Mr. Shimron’s sister. But the concentration of so much power in the hands of two men, and one law firm, “had immense financial significance,” Nahum Barnea, a leading Israeli columnist, wrote Tuesday. “Ministers felt it necessary to do their bidding, directors general considered every request of theirs as coming from the prime minister, business tycoons sought them out,” he wrote. “The state’s most sensitive matters, Likud matters, family matters and business interests related to the government, were conducted by one law firm.” Most immediately, the questioning of Mr. Molho — a publicity-averse, urbane eminence for whom leak-proof discretion has been a calling card — added to the image of Mr. Netanyahu as embattled, with few untainted advisers left, weakening poll numbers and opponents campaigning openly to succeed him, often by citing the investigations whipping through his inner circle. “If he’s not responsible, then he’s a bad manager,” said Avi Gabbay, the Labor Party’s chairman and candidate for prime minister. Image Yitzhak Molho, a longtime adviser to Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu of Israel, has been questioned by the police about the multibillion-dollar purchase of new submarines from a German shipbuilding company. Credit Nir Keidar/Agence France-Presse — Getty Images “For sure, it’s right that the prime minister will take people that he trusts, but to put them in such delicate areas and issues while they have their private interests, while they represent the business sector?” Mr. Gabbay, himself a former chief executive of Bezeq, Israel’s largest telecommunications company, said in an interview. “It’s impossible. It cannot be.” Mr. Netanyahu has not been named as a suspect in the submarine case. For Mr. Shimron, who has long served as Mr. Netanyahu’s lawyer on personal matters, his entanglement in the submarine case stems from his representation of Michael Ganor, the Israeli agent for the German shipbuilder, ThyssenKrupp Marine Systems. The same company also won a no-bid contract to build missile ships to protect Israel’s offshore gas drilling platforms after a competitive international bidding process was abruptly canceled. Mr. Ganor has since become a state witness. It was unclear exactly what information the police sought from Mr. Molho. In a statement, Zvi Agnon, a lawyer for Mr. Molho, said that in his many years as an envoy Mr. Molho had never acted for personal gain, only for the good of the country, and that he had no connection to the submarine case. But Mr. Molho’s name had surfaced in connection with the submarine purchase at least once before, over the summer, after it was reported that ThyssenKrupp had contracted to sell similar vessels to Egypt, despite a longstanding Israeli policy to demand exclusivity for its weapons systems in the Middle East. According to the Israeli newspaper Yedioth Ahronoth, when the former defense minister, Moshe Yaalon, inquired why Germany had failed to honor the terms of its exclusivity agreement with Israel, the Germans said that an agreement had been reached with Mr. Molho, acting on Mr. Netanyahu’s behalf. This is not Mr. Molho’s first run-in with accusations of conflict of interest. In 2013, he quit Mr. Netanyahu’s negotiating team in talks to form a governing coalition after Israel’s attorney general ruled he could not continue at the same time to represent Mr. Netanyahu in peace talks with the Palestinians. Mr. Molho actually resigned as a special envoy last month, in the face of a petition calling on him to suspend himself because of his ties to Mr. Shimron. He delayed his exit until February at Mr. Netanyahu’s request. But Mr. Molho’s questioning by the police raises doubts about whether he would be able to stay on any longer. As a negotiator with the Palestinians, Mr. Molho was considered likable and forthright, but highly focused on details — to the point that some of his United States counterparts called him “Dr. No” during the talks led by Secretary of State John Kerry during the Obama administration. Others said Mr. Molho was just serving as a good lawyer for a client, Mr. Netanyahu, who was not eager for a far-reaching commitment. For now, with the investigation sidelining his most trusted aides, Mr. Netanyahu could find himself at a disadvantage, analysts said. “It won’t be easy for him to right his ship when Molho and Shimron are not there to help him,” Mr. Barnea, the columnist, said. “They were the pillars of his royal court.” Isabel Kershner contributed reporting.  A version of this article appears in print on , on Page A 9 of the New York edition with the headline: Adviser to Netanyahu Is Questioned in Israel . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Related Coverage New Arrests in Israel’s Submarine Scandal, and New Questions on Netanyahu Sept. 4, 2017 Image Sara Netanyahu, Wife of Israeli Prime Minister, to Face Fraud Charges Sept. 8, 2017 Image As Netanyahu Investigators Close In, Some Ask: How Long Can He Hold On? Aug. 6, 2017 Image Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              