   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Politics Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Attorney General Orders Tougher Sentences, Rolling Back Obama Policy Image Attorney General Jeff Sessions has in the past suggested that prosecuting drug crimes more vigorously will broadly reduce other crime. Credit Jim Lo Scalzo/European Pressphoto Agency By  Rebecca R. Ruiz May 12, 2017 WASHINGTON — Attorney General Jeff Sessions has ordered federal prosecutors to pursue the toughest possible charges and sentences against crime suspects, he announced Friday, reversing Obama administration efforts to ease penalties for some nonviolent drug violations. The drastic shift in criminal justice policy, foreshadowed during recent weeks, is Mr. Sessions’s first major stamp on the Justice Department, and it highlights several of his top targets: drug dealing, gun crime and gang violence. In an eight-paragraph memo , Mr. Sessions returned to the guidance of President George W. Bush’s administration by calling for more uniform punishments — including mandatory minimum sentences — and instructing prosecutors to pursue the harshest possible charges. Mr. Sessions’s policy is broader than that of the Bush administration, however, and how it is carried out will depend more heavily on the judgments of United States attorneys and assistant attorneys general as they bring charges. The policy signaled a return to “enforcing the laws that Congress has passed,” Mr. Sessions said Friday at the Justice Department, characterizing his memo as unique for the leeway it afforded prosecutors. “They deserve to be un-handcuffed and not micromanaged from Washington,” he said. “It means we are going to meet our responsibility to enforce the law with judgment and fairness.” But Mr. Sessions’s memo also highlighted the gulf between his views on sentencing and a growing bipartisan push for an overhaul of the criminal justice system. A major reform bill gained steam in Congress last year but foundered amid congressional dysfunction and Donald J. Trump’s campaign push for what he termed a restoration of law and order. Numerous states have also enacted overhauls to their criminal justice systems in recent years. Even some within the Republican Party criticized Mr. Sessions. Senator Mike Lee of Utah labeled an overhaul of the criminal justice system a conservative issue. “To be tough on crime, we have to be smart on crime,” he wrote on Twitter . Memo by Sessions to U.S. Attorneys on Charges and Sentencing The Department of Justice sent a memorandum, dated on Wednesday, establishing policy for charging and sentencing. May 12, 2017 Freedom Partners, an action fund partly funded by the conservative Koch brothers, advocated changes to the law and pointed to the failed legislation as a place to start anew. Senator Tom Cotton, an Arkansas Republican who spoke out last year against the overhaul legislation, backed the new directive. “I agree with Attorney General Sessions that law enforcement should side with the victims of crime rather than its perpetrators,” he said. Mr. Sessions’s memo replaced the orders of former Attorney General Eric H. Holder Jr., who in 2013 took aim at drug sentencing rules. He encouraged prosecutors to consider the individual circumstances of a case and to exercise discretion in charging drug crimes. In cases of nonviolent defendants with insignificant criminal histories and no connections to criminal organizations, Mr. Holder instructed prosecutors to omit details about drug quantities from charging documents so as not to trigger automatically harsh penalties. Mr. Holder called Mr. Sessions’s policy “unwise and ill-informed,” saying in a statement that it ignored the consensus between Democrats and Republicans to overhaul the criminal justice system and also rejected data demonstrating that prosecutions of high-level drug defendants had risen under his guidance. “This absurd reversal is driven by voices who have not only been discredited but until now have been relegated to the fringes of this debate,” he said. Mr. Sessions’s memo explicitly mentioned Mr. Holder’s 2013 directive in a footnote and rescinded it effective immediately. The policy is most similar to one issued by Attorney General John Ashcroft in 2003. Then, Mr. Ashcroft outlined six types of “ limited exceptions ” in his memo — which ran nearly four times the length of Mr. Sessions’s new guidance, and repeatedly referred to certain federal statutes. Mr. Sessions, by contrast, provided few specifics. Instead, he simply directed prosecutors to “carefully consider whether an exception may be justified.” He said any such exceptions to ease criminal penalties must be documented and approved by United States attorneys, assistant attorneys general or their designees. Kevin H. Sharp, who until last month was a federal judge for the Middle District of Tennessee, warned that a lack of specifics could hold back prosecutors from exercising discretion when it might be warranted. “You don’t know what the exception is, so it makes it harder to justify it,” he said. “You have to write a memo and run it up for approval — you’re going to get fewer people doing that.” Mr. Sessions has said he believes that critics of mandatory minimum sentences are ignoring the Justice Department’s duty to enforce federal law. David Alan Sklansky, a law professor at Stanford University who specializes in criminal justice, disagreed in part. “Not everybody who falls within the letter of the criminal prohibition is somebody who deserves that kind of criminal punishment,” he said. “It’s not about excusing people or condoning criminal behavior; it’s a question of trying to figure out how much punishment is enough and at what point are you piling on needlessly and at great cost.” Mr. Sessions has argued that violent crimes such as murder can be an outgrowth of drug crime, and has suggested that prosecuting drug crimes more vigorously will reduce crime more broadly. “Many violent crimes are driven by drug trafficking and drug-trafficking organizations,” Mr. Sessions, who was a prosecutor at the height of the 1980s crack epidemic, wrote in a March 8 memo. Mr. Sklansky said it was unclear how dramatic an impact Mr. Sessions’s new policy may have. “Prosecutors in the field appropriately pay attention to and try to follow the directions they receive from Washington,” he said. “A reversal or replacement of the Holder memo will be interpreted by many prosecutors in the field as a direction to be more aggressive to use mandatory minimum penalties against low-level nonviolent drug offenders. “It’s hard to know how much of an effect it will have,” he added, “but it will have an effect.”  Get politics and Washington news updates via Facebook , Twitter and in the Morning Briefing newsletter . A version of this article appears in print on , on Page A 15 of the New York edition with the headline: Sessions Tells Prosecutors To Seek Harsher Penalties . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Related Coverage Sessions to Toughen Rules on Prosecuting Drug Crimes May 9, 2017 Image On Long Island, Sessions Vows to Eradicate MS-13 Gang April 28, 2017 Image Jeff Sessions Dismisses Hawaii as ‘an Island in the Pacific’ April 20, 2017 Image Jeff Sessions, a Lifelong Outsider, Finds the Inside Track Jan. 8, 2017 Image Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              