   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Times Insider Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Trump’s First Year, as Told by Our Washington Bureau Image President Trump talks to journalists in the Oval Office in December. Credit Doug Mills/The New York Times By  Ed Winstead Jan. 16, 2018 查看简体中文版 查看繁體中文版 Peter Baker, the chief White House correspondent for The New York Times, had a problem. He was hosting a party whose guests included a bipartisan group of former White House staffers, and there wasn’t enough ice. While he was driving to the store, his phone rang. It was his wife, the journalist Susan Glasser. “Don’t worry, I’m getting the ice,” he told her. “No, no, no, you don’t understand,” she said. “The president just fired the F.B.I. director.” He returned, bag of ice in hand, to a room full of White House veterans, Democrat and Republican, stunned by the news. “It was striking to have all these people, very experienced people in Washington, there in that moment,” he said, “mouths agape, trying to process what had just happened and what it might mean.” He excused himself from his own party and ran upstairs to write. There was no indication that the May 9 firing of the F.B.I. chief, James B. Comey, had been coming. The White House correspondent Michael D. Shear broke the news for The Times , as he happened to be at the White House that afternoon to run an errand. When Sean Spicer, then the president’s press secretary, appeared in the almost-empty briefing room to announce the news, Mr. Shear sent an email to The Times’s Washington bureau from his phone: Comey fired . “It was all on the fly,” he said. “In a different White House, it would be mapped out to the n th degree.” For the journalists who have covered the first year of Donald J. Trump’s presidency, such episodes have come to be expected. “It’s relentless, the unpredictability of it,” said Elisabeth Bumiller, the Washington bureau chief. “I knew it would be really wild and different, but I expected him to be somewhat different than the candidate Trump, and he really hasn’t been.” “I think he just fundamentally doesn’t understand what the White House press corps does,” added the White House correspondent Maggie Haberman, “because the press he’s used to interacting with” — business, celebrity and tabloid coverage — “is so different.” The early days of the administration, a period usually marked by a steep learning curve for a new White House staff, were especially chaotic. When Mr. Trump’s first travel ban was issued , on Jan. 27, administration officials “couldn’t even tell which countries it was,” Mr. Shear said. “They were putting on a good face, but they had no idea what was going on.” The White House correspondent Julie Hirschfeld Davis asked three officials that evening whether the ban affected green card holders, and received three different answers. “There were no talking points, so they didn’t know what to say,” she said. “Some of them were guessing, some of them were afraid to guess.” The White House has settled into more of a rhythm in recent months, according to several Times journalists who cover it, a shift they attributed in part to personnel changes — particularly the replacement of Mr. Spicer with Sarah Huckabee Sanders and of Reince Priebus, the former chief of staff, with John F. Kelly. The bureau, too, has adjusted. In response to the president’s early-morning Twitter habit, for example, reporters and editors are on duty at 6 each morning. And the bureau’s staff has grown from about 70 people in November 2016 to more than 100 now. Still, much of the unpredictability that has characterized this administration cannot be compensated for — it is a function of the president himself. “There isn’t some secret sauce to covering him,” said Ms. Haberman. “He’s incredibly unusual. He’d never run for office before and he won the presidency. This is a strange moment in history. He has no familiarity with the government that he oversees. I cannot describe how strange this all is. Sometimes you just have to show and not tell.” When Mr. Trump sat down with the Washington correspondent Michael S. Schmidt for an impromptu interview last month , not even the president’s staff knew it was coming. The interview itself would have been unthinkable in prior administrations. Mr. Trump, however, often seems to enjoy engaging with journalists, whether or not his staff would like him to. The unpredictability is compounded by the president’s unprecedented obfuscation and denial of facts, and by offensive off-the-cuff comments like those he reportedly made last week in a White House meeting, all of which can leave his staff scrambling to defend the seemingly indefensible. Still, Ms. Davis said, “In a lot of ways, they have embraced the chaos, and understood on some level that it keeps the press off balance, and that’s where any White House likes the press to be.” Although Mr. Trump has avoided traditional news conferences, he has developed a habit of stopping to speak with reporters on the White House lawn before boarding Marine One — and of going off-script at events, as he did in October, when an appearance with Senator Mitch McConnell, the majority leader, turned into a freewheeling 45-minute question-and-answer session. And then there are, of course, the tweets. The result, Mr. Shear said, is that despite the anarchic nature of covering Mr. Trump, “we know so much more about what this president is thinking at any given moment than we ever did with Obama. Just because he wears it on his sleeve, and he tells us.” That includes Mr. Trump’s professed feelings about the “failing New York Times,” as he often calls it. “I think he wants validation, and that he feels angry when he doesn’t feel like he’s getting the respect he deserves from the paper,” Mr. Baker said. “It’s all politics,” Ms. Bumiller said. “We’re sort of amused by it now.”  Keep up with Times Insider stories on Twitter, via the Reader Center: @ReaderCenter . A version of this article appears in print on , on Page A 2 of the New York edition with the headline: Times Reporters on Trump’s First Year . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              