   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index U.S. Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Roger Boesche, Professor Who Stirred Obama’s Interest in Politics, Dies at 69 Image Roger Boesche in 2007 at Occidental College in Los Angeles. In 2010, President Barack Obama said Mr. Boesche’s political science class had been his favorite. Credit Brian Vander Brug/Los Angeles Times, via Getty Images By  The Associated Press May 25, 2017 Roger Boesche, a popular professor and distinguished scholar who was credited by former President Barack Obama with stirring his interest in politics when he was an undergraduate at Occidental College in Los Angeles, died on Tuesday at his home near the campus. He was 69. A university spokesman, Jim Tranquada, said Professor Boesche died in his sleep. No cause of death was given. The professor had been treated for rheumatoid arthritis since childhood and had undergone numerous surgeries throughout his life. He had recently announced that he would retire after 40 years. Last Sunday, at the university’s commencement ceremonies, he received a standing ovation. In 2010, when reporters asked Mr. Obama to name his favorite college class, he replied: “I had a wonderful political science class. I still remember the name of the professor, Roger Boesche, at Occidental College.” Image Professor Boesche in 1977, at the start of his career at Occidental. Credit Occidental College Special Collections, via Associated Press He added, “It sparked my general interest in politics.” Mr. Obama transferred from Occidental to Columbia University after his sophomore year and earned a law degree from Harvard. He invited Professor Boesche to the White House in 2009. He was “a wonderful, wonderful teacher,” Mr. Obama said. Professor Boesche was born on Jan. 24, 1948, in Tulsa, Okla., and earned his bachelor’s degree and doctorate in political science at Stanford University, where he led protests against the Vietnam War and met his future wife, Mandy Boesche , now a performing arts teacher and musical director. He was hired by Occidental in 1977, beating out approximately 250 other applicants for the job, according to the college. Soon after arriving, he led efforts to have the university sever business ties with South Africa while it was ruled by its apartheid government. Students twice voted him Occidental’s best teacher, and his fellow teachers chose him as faculty president in the 1990s. An expert on political theory and history, Professor Boesche published several books, including “Theories of Tyranny: From Plato to Arendt” and “The Strange Liberalism of Alexis de Tocqueville.” He learned he had rheumatoid arthritis at 15, and after he endured more than a dozen surgeries, he said, one doctor told him not to expect to live past 60. He used a wheelchair in his later years. He and his wife nonetheless visited 120 countries, he said, and were collaborating on a travel book. He is survived by his wife and their daughter, Kelsey Boesche. Just as Mr. Obama was asked about Professor Boesche, Professor Boesche was asked about Mr. Obama. He recalled the day the future president came to him and asked why he had received a B in political theory instead of an A. He had a ready answer: “I said, ‘Well, frankly, I think you’re really brilliant, but you don’t work hard enough.’”  Read more obituaries and follow our coverage on Twitter . A version of this article appears in print on , on Page A 21 of the New York edition with the headline: Roger Boesche, 69; Class Inspired Obama . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              