   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index Today’s Paper The Advance of Science in Its Relation to Human Values; A Symposium of Eminent Thinkers on the Problem of Man's Mastery of Knowledge SCIENCE AND MAN. Twenty-four original essays, edited with Introduction and Conclusion by R.N. Anshen. 499 pp. New York: Harcourt, Brace Company. $4. https://www.nytimes.com/1942/05/17/archives/the-advance-of-science-in-its-relation-to-human-values-a-symposium.html Advertisement Continue reading the main story Supported by Continue reading the main story 1 The Advance of Science in Its Relation to Human Values; A Symposium of Eminent Thinkers on the Problem of Man's Mastery of Knowledge SCIENCE AND MAN. Twenty-four original essays, edited with Introduction and Conclusion by R.N. Anshen. 499 pp. New York: Harcourt, Brace Company. $4. Read in app By Clifford Barrett May 17, 1942 Credit... The New York Times Archives See the article in its original context from May 17, 1942 ,  Section BOOK , Page  3 Buy Reprints View on timesmachine TimesMachine is an exclusive benefit for home delivery and digital subscribers. Full text is unavailable for this digitized archive article. Subscribers may view the full text of this article in its original form through TimesMachine. HERE is an exceptionally intelligent treatment of a fundamental and contemporary problem -- the relations of advancing science and technology to broader human values. If this advance continues to a point where science and industry may serve man with maximum efficiency, paradoxically must they not destroy their own worth to him by coming to dominate his culture and enslave his spirit?  View Full Article in Timesmachine » Advertisement Continue reading the main story Site Information Navigation © 2021  The New York Times Company NYTCo Contact Us Accessibility Work with us Advertise T Brand Studio Your Ad Choices Privacy Policy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Canada International Help Subscriptions                