   Sections SEARCH Skip to content Skip to site index U.S. Subscribe Log In Subscribe Log In Advertisement Supported by Dan Walker, 92, Dies; Illinois Governor and Later a U.S. Prisoner Image Dan Walker in 1987, the year he pleaded guilty to fraud and perjury and was sentenced to federal prison. Credit Frank Hanes/Chicago Tribune, via Associated Press By  The Associated Press April 29, 2015 Dan Walker, a former governor of Illinois who spent four tumultuous years in office and nearly 18 months in federal prison after leaving office, died on Wednesday at his home in Chula Vista, Calif. He was 92. His son Dan Jr. confirmed his death. Mr. Walker was one of a new breed of Illinois politician that disdained traditional political organization, and he won office in 1972 on a populist platform after capturing the Democratic nomination over the establishment candidate, Lt. Gov. Paul Simon, who was later elected to the House and then the Senate. A corporate lawyer at the time, Mr. Walker grabbed voters’ attention in 1971 by walking across Illinois for 116 days, sleeping in farmhouses. “Government is out of touch with the people,” he would proclaim, promising to hold down taxes and increase education spending. He went on to beat the Republican incumbent, Richard B. Ogilvie. As governor. Mr. Walker alienated Republicans and his fellow Democrats, particularly the Democratic powerhouse Richard J. Daley, the mayor of Chicago, and had few significant accomplishments. Mr. Walker said the political establishment did not want him to succeed and blocked his legislation. He was defeated in the 1976 Democratic primary by a Daley-backed candidate, Secretary of State Michael Howlett, who lost in the general election to James R. Thompson, a Republican. After leaving office, Mr. Walker became the head of a suburban Chicago savings and loan, which he used to support a lavish lifestyle. He pleaded guilty to fraud and perjury and was sentenced to federal prison in 1987. He later wrote about life behind bars in a memoir, “The Maverick and the Machine: Governor Dan Walker Tells His Story” (2007). Mr. Walker was born in Washington on Aug. 6, 1922, and grew up largely near San Diego, where his father, Lewis, was stationed as a chief petty officer with the Navy. Dan Walker was valedictorian at San Diego High School and joined the Navy as a seaman before enrolling at the Naval Academy at Annapolis, Md., graduating in 1945. He left the Navy in 1947 but was recalled to active duty during the Korean War and served on a destroyer. He graduated from Northwestern University Law School in 1950 and was a law clerk to Supreme Court Justice Fred M. Vinson. He was later an aide to Gov. Adlai Stevenson II and vice president and general counsel of Montgomery Ward. He is survived by his wife, Lily Stewart, as well as seven children, 22 grandchildren and four great-grandchildren, The Chicago Tribune said. A version of this article appears in print on , on Page A 28 of the New York edition with the headline: Dan Walker, 92, an Illinois Governor and Later a U.S. Prisoner . Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe Advertisement Site Index Go to Home Page » news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings listings & more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account news home page world U.S. politics politics New York business tech science sports obituaries today's paper corrections corrections opinion today's opinion today's opinion op-ed columnists editorials editorials contributing writers op-ed Contributors letters letters sunday review sunday review taking note video: opinion arts today's arts art & design books dance movies music television theater video: arts living automobiles automobiles crossword food food education fashion & style health jobs magazine real estate t magazine travel weddings more tools & services N.Y.C. events guide multimedia photography photography video NYT store times journeys manage my account Subscribe home delivery digital subscriptions Crossword email newsletters corporate subscriptions education rate mobile applications replica edition Site Information Navigation © 2018  The New York Times Company Contact Us Work with us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Map Help Help Subscriptions Collapse SEE MY OPTIONS              